*EDDARD
“诸神慈悲，”戴文喃喃地说，“一只手。”
T he grey light of dawn was streaming through his window when the thunder of hoofbeats awoke Eddard Stark from his brief, exhausted sleep. He lifted his head from the table to look down into the yard. Below, men in mail and leather and crimson cloaks were making the morning ring to the sound of swords, and riding down mock warriors stuffed with straw. Ned watched Sandor Clegane gallop across the hard-packed ground to drive an iron-tipped lance through a dummy’s head. Canvas ripped and straw exploded as Lannister guardsmen joked and cursed.
第五十章 艾德
Is this brave show for my benefit, he wondered. If so, Cersei was a greater fool than he’d imagined. Damn her , he thought, why is the woman not fled? I have given her chance after chance …
如雷的蹄声将艾德·史塔克自短暂的浅眠中惊醒，灰色的晨光正透过窗户流泄进屋。他从桌上抬起头，朝楼下的广场望去。全副武装，身着鲜红披风的人正进行着例行的晨间操演，或举剑交击，或骑马砍倒稻草扎成的假人。奈德看到桑铎·克里冈策马飞驰，穿过硬泥土地，举起铁枪刺穿傀儡的头。布块碎裂，稻草飞扬，兰尼斯特家的侍卫在旁谈笑咒骂。
The morning was overcast and grim. Ned broke his fast with his daughters and Septa Mordane. Sansa, still disconsolate, stared sullenly at her food and refused to eat, but Arya wolfed down everything that was set in front of her. “Syrio says we have time for one last lesson before we take ship this evening,” she said. “Can I, Father? All my things are packed.”
这是故意表演给我看的吗？他心想，果真如此，那瑟曦比他想像的还愚昧。该死，这女人为什么不逃走？我一次又一次给她机会……
“A short lesson, and make certain you leave yourself time to bathe and change. I want you ready to leave by midday, is that understood?”
晨色阴霾，多云且沉重。奈德和女儿们及茉丹修女共进早餐。珊莎仍在赌气，拉下脸盯着眼前的食物，一口也不吃。艾莉亚则狼吞虎咽地吃光面前所有东西。“西利欧说晚上搭船前还可以再上一堂课。”她说，“父亲，我可以去吗？我的东西都打包好了。”
“By midday,” Arya said.
“不能太久，还有，记得留时间洗澡换衣服。我希望你中午就准备好，知道吗？”
Sansa looked up from her food. “If she can have a dancing lesson, why won’t you let me say farewell to Prince Joffrey?”
“好。”艾莉亚说。
“I would gladly go with her, Lord Eddard,” Septa Mordane offered. “There would be no question of her missing the ship.”
珊莎将视线从食物上抬起来。“她可以上舞蹈课，为什么不准我去跟乔佛里王子道别？”
“It would not be wise for you to go to Joffrey right now, Sansa. I’m sorry.”
“艾德大人，我很乐意陪她一起去。”茉丹修女提议，“我绝不会让她错过搭船时间。”
Sansa’s eyes filled with tears. “But why?”
“珊莎，现在不适合让你见乔佛里。我很抱歉。”
“Sansa, your lord father knows best,” Septa Mordane said. “You are not to question his decisions.”
珊莎泪眼汪汪。“为什么不适合？”
“It’s not fair!” Sansa pushed back from her table, knocked over her chair, and ran weeping from the solar.
“珊莎，你父亲知道怎么做最好，”茉丹修女说，“你不该怀疑他的决定。”
Septa Mordane rose, but Ned gestured her back to her seat. “Let her go, Septa. I will try to make her understand when we are all safely back in Winterfell.” The septa bowed her head and sat down to finish her breakfast.
“这太不公平了！”珊莎向后一推，弄倒椅子，哭哭啼啼地逃离书房。
It was an hour later when Grand Maester Pycelle came to Eddard Stark in his solar. His shoulders slumped, as if the weight of the great maester’s chain around his neck had become too great to bear. “My lord,” he said, “King Robert is gone. The gods give him rest.”
茉丹修女起身，但奈德举手示意她坐下。“修女，让她去吧。有朝一日，等我们全体都安然返回临冬城，我再跟她解释。”修女点点头，坐下继续吃早餐。
“No,” Ned answered. “He hated rest. The gods give him love and laughter, and the joy of righteous battle.” It was strange how empty he felt. He had been expecting the visit, and yet with those words, something died within him. He would have given all his titles for the freedom to weep … but he was Robert’s Hand, and the hour he dreaded had come. “Be so good as to summon the members of the council here to my solar,” he told Pycelle. The Tower of the Hand was as secure as he and Tomard could make it; he could not say the same for the council chambers.
一小时后，派席尔国师走进艾德·史塔克的书房。他驼着背，仿佛脖子上的链令他不堪重负。“大人，”他说，“劳勃国王陛下走了。愿天上诸神让他安息。”
“My lord?” Pycelle blinked. “Surely the affairs of the kingdom will keep till the morrow, when our grief is not so fresh.”
“不，”奈德回答，“他最讨厌休息，愿诸神赐他爱与欢笑，以及为正义而战的喜悦。”他只感觉好生沉重。明知迟早会有这一刻，然而当实际听到这些话语，心中的某些部分依然随之死去。他愿用所有的头衔换取哭泣的自由……但他是劳勃的首相，而他所畏惧的时刻已经来临。“有劳您把朝廷重臣都请到我书房来。”他告诉派席尔。他和托马德已经尽可能地确保首相塔安全无虞，换做议事厅他就不敢担保了。
Ned was quiet but firm. “I fear we must convene at once.”
“大人，这样好吗？”派席尔眨眨眼，“是不是等明天我们不那么难过了，再来共商大计？”
Pycelle bowed. “As the Hand commands.” He called his servants and sent them running, then gratefully accepted Ned’s offer of a chair and a cup of sweet beer.
奈德语气平静而坚决。“恐怕我们必须现在就开会。”
Ser Barristan Selmy was the first to answer the summons, immaculate in white cloak and enameled scales. “My lords,” he said, “my place is beside the young king now. Pray give me leave to attend him.”
派席尔鞠躬，“谨遵首相吩咐。”他召来仆人，遣他们快步跑去，自己则感激地接受奈德的椅子和一杯甜啤酒。
“Your place is here, Ser Barristan,” Ned told him.
巴利斯坦·赛尔弥率先抵达，一身雪白披风，雕花铠甲，十足洁白无瑕模样。“两位大人，”他说，“如今我的职责所在是守护年轻的国王，请让我去服侍他。”
Littlefinger came next, still garbed in the blue velvets and silver mockingbird cape he had worn the night previous, his boots dusty from riding. “My lords,” he said, smiling at nothing in particular before he turned to Ned. “That little task you set me is accomplished, Lord Eddard.”
“巴利斯坦爵士，你的职责所在是这里。”奈德告诉他。
Varys entered in a wash of lavender, pink from his bath, his plump face scrubbed and freshly powdered, his soft slippers all but soundless. “The little birds sing a grievous song today,” he said as he seated himself. “The realm weeps. Shall we begin?”
第二个来的是小指头，依旧穿着昨晚那套蓝天鹅绒和灰仿声鸟斗篷，靴子上沾了骑马的尘土。“诸位大人好，”他泛泛地作个微笑，然后转向奈德。“艾德大人，您要我办的那件小事已经妥了。”
“When Lord Renly arrives,” Ned said.
瓦里斯浑身薰衣草味地进来，他刚洗过澡，胖脸刷洗干净又新扑过粉，脚下的软拖鞋轻柔无声。“今儿个小小鸟儿唱着悲伤的歌谣，”他边坐下边说，“举国都在哭泣。让我们开始吧？”
Varys gave him a sorrowful look. “I fear Lord Renly has left the city.”
“先等蓝礼大人。”奈德说。
“Left the city?” Ned had counted on Renly’s support.
瓦里斯哀怨地看了他一眼。“恐怕蓝礼大人已经出城了。”
“He took his leave through a postern gate an hour before dawn, accompanied by Ser Loras Tyrell and some fifty retainers,” Varys told them. “When last seen, they were galloping south in some haste, no doubt bound for Storm’s End or Highgarden.”
“出城了？”奈德本寄望蓝礼支持他。
So much for Renly and his hundred swords . Ned did not like the smell of that, but there was nothing to be done for it. He drew out Robert’s last letter. “The king called me to his side last night and commanded me to record his final words. Lord Renly and Grand Maester Pycelle stood witness as Robert sealed the letter, to be opened by the council after his death. Ser Barristan, if you would be so kind?”
“天亮前一个小时左右，他自侧门离开，随他一起走的还有洛拉斯·提利尔爵士和五十名随从。”瓦里斯告诉他们，“据最新情报，他们正快马加鞭往南赶，无疑是奔风息堡或高庭而去。”
The Lord Commander of the Kingsguard examined the paper. “King Robert’s seal, and unbroken.” He opened the letter and read. “Lord Eddard Stark is herein named Protector of the Realm, to rule as regent until the heir comes of age.”
好个蓝礼的一百士兵。这情形虽对奈德不利，却也无可奈何。他抽出劳勃的遗嘱。“昨晚国王召我到他身边，命令我记下他的遗言。劳勃盖下御印时，蓝礼大人和派席尔大学士都在现场作证。这封信该等国王陛下死后由御前会议开启。巴利斯坦爵士，可否劳您检查一番？”
And as it happens, he is of age , Ned reflected, but he did not give voice to the thought. He trusted neither Pycelle nor Varys, and Ser Barristan was honor-bound to protect and defend the boy he thought his new king. The old knight would not abandon Joffrey easily. The need for deceit was a bitter taste in his mouth, but Ned knew he must tread softly here, must keep his counsel and play the game until he was firmly established as regent. There would be time enough to deal with the succession when Arya and Sansa were safely back in Winterfell, and Lord Stannis had returned to King’s Landing with all his power.
御林铁卫队长仔细检视那张纸。“这确是劳勃国王的印信，并未经拆封。”他打开信读出来。“……史塔克家族的艾德为摄政王及全境守护者，代余统理国事，俟吾之合法继承人成年为止。”
“I would ask this council to confirm me as Lord Protector, as Robert wished,” Ned said, watching their faces, wondering what thoughts hid behind Pycelle’s half-closed eyes, Littlefinger’s lazy half-smile, and the nervous flutter of Varys’s fingers.
事实上，这个继承人早就成年了。奈德心想，但没说出口。他不信任派席尔和瓦里斯，巴利斯坦爵士则认定那男孩是新国王，出于荣誉执意要保护他。这老骑士只怕不会轻易放弃乔佛里。虽然用欺骗的方式为他所不愿，但奈德很清楚自己必须步步为营，先不动声色地继续从前的游戏，静待他摄政王的地位逐渐巩固。等艾莉亚和珊莎平安返回临冬城，史坦尼斯公爵也带着军队进驻君临，再来好好解决继承权的问题不迟。
The door opened. Fat Tom stepped into the solar. “Pardon, my lords, the king’s steward insists …”
“我要请诸位依照劳勃遗愿，确认我摄政王的身份。”奈德边说边看众人的脸，揣测派席尔那双半阖上的眼睛，小指头慵懒的浅笑和瓦里斯焦虑抖动的手指背后，隐藏的是什么样的想法。
The royal steward entered and bowed. “Esteemed lords, the king demands the immediate presence of his small council in the throne room.”
门突然打开。胖汤姆走进书房。“诸位大人，请见谅，国王的总管坚持……”
Ned had expected Cersei to strike quickly; the summons came as no surprise. “The king is dead,” he said, “but we shall go with you nonetheless. Tom, assemble an escort, if you would.”
御前总管进来鞠躬道：“各位可敬的大人，国王要求立刻在王座厅召开御前会议。”
Littlefinger gave Ned his arm to help him down the steps. Varys, Pycelle, and Ser Barristan followed close behind. A double column of men-at-arms in chainmail and steel helms was waiting outside the tower, eight strong. Grey cloaks snapped in the wind as the guardsmen marched them across the yard. There was no Lannister crimson to be seen, but Ned was reassured by the number of gold cloaks visible on the ramparts and at the gates.
奈德早料到瑟曦会抢先下手，因此这次召见他丝毫不感意外。“国王已死。”他说，“但我们还是跟你去。汤姆，请你安排护送。”
Janos Slynt met them at the door to the throne room, armored in ornate black-and-gold plate, with a high-crested helm under one arm. The Commander bowed stiffly. His men pushed open the great oaken doors, twenty feet tall and banded with bronze.
小指头伸手搀扶奈德走下台阶。瓦里斯，派席尔和巴利斯坦爵士紧跟在后。身穿锁甲，头戴钢盔的临冬城卫士成两列纵队等在高塔外，一共八人。卫士护送他们穿过广场，灰色披风在风中啪啪作响。四下虽不见兰尼斯特的鲜红，却有不少金色披风的都城守卫在城墙上和大门边巡逻，令奈德稍觉安心。
The royal steward led them in. “All hail His Grace, Joffrey of the Houses Baratheon and Lannister, the First of his Name, King of the Andals and the Rhoynar and the First Men, Lord of the Seven Kingdoms and Protector of the Realm,” he sang out.
杰诺斯·史林特在大厅门口迎接，他穿着一件雕饰华丽的黑金铠甲，腋下夹着一顶高羽头盔。都城守卫司令僵硬地点个头，他的部下便推开足有二十尺高、镶青铜边的橡木大门。
It was a long walk to the far end of the hall, where Joffrey waited atop the Iron Throne. Supported by Littlefinger, Ned Stark slowly limped and hopped toward the boy who called himself king. The others followed. The first time he had come this way, he had been on horseback, sword in hand, and the Targaryen dragons had watched from the walls as he forced Jaime Lannister down from the throne. He wondered if Joffrey would step down quite so easily.
御前总管领他们进去。“恭迎安达尔人、洛伊拿人和先民的国王，七国统治者暨全境守护者，拜拉席恩家族与兰尼斯特家族的乔佛里一世陛下。”他朗声唱诵。
Five knights of the Kingsguard—all but Ser Jaime and Ser Barristan—were arrayed in a crescent around the base of the throne. They were in full armor, enameled steel from helm to heel, long pale cloaks over their shoulders, shining white shields strapped to their left arms. Cersei Lannister and her two younger children stood behind Ser Boros and Ser Meryn. The queen wore a gown of sea-green silk, trimmed with Myrish lace as pale as foam. On her finger was a golden ring with an emerald the size of a pigeon’s egg, on her head a matching tiara.
离大厅另一头还有段漫长的路，乔佛里正坐在铁王座上等他。在小指头的搀扶之下，奈德·史塔克一跛一跛地缓步朝那个自命为王的男孩走去，其他人紧随在后。他头一次走上这条路，乃是身骑骏马，手持利剑，逼迫詹姆·兰尼斯特走下王座，坦格利安的龙头则从四面墙壁上冷眼旁观。他不知乔佛里是否也会那么听话地放弃王位。
Above them, Prince Joffrey sat amidst the barbs and spikes in a cloth-of-gold doublet and a red satin cape. Sandor Clegane was stationed at the foot of the throne’s steep narrow stair. He wore mail and soot-grey plate and his snarling dog’s-head helm.
五名御林铁卫——除开詹姆爵士和巴利斯坦爵士——全部到场，呈新月形围绕着王座底部。他们全副武装，从头到脚披挂着精美的铠甲头盔，长长的白披风抖在身后，闪亮的白盾牌绑上左臂。瑟曦·兰尼斯特和她两个年纪较小的孩子站在柏洛斯爵士和马林爵士后面。王后穿了一袭海绿色丝质长袍，边上绣了白如浪花的密尔蕾丝。手上带了一枚镶有鸽子蛋那么大翡翠的金戒指，头上还有一顶式样相称的金头环。
Behind the throne, twenty Lannister guardsmen waited with longswords hanging from their belts. Crimson cloaks draped their shoulders and steel lions crested their helms. But Littlefinger had kept his promise; all along the walls, in front of Robert’s tapestries with their scenes of hunt and battle, the gold-cloaked ranks of the City Watch stood stiffly to attention, each man’s hand clasped around the haft of an eight-foot-long spear tipped in black iron. They outnumbered the Lannisters five to one.
在他们上方密布尖刺的椅子里，坐了穿着金线外衣，红缎披风的乔佛里。桑铎·克里冈站在王座陡峭而狭窄的楼梯口。他身穿烟灰色的铠甲，戴着那顶狰狞狗头盔。
Ned’s leg was a blaze of pain by the time he stopped. He kept a hand on Littlefinger’s shoulder to help support his weight.
王座后方，有二十名腰悬长剑的兰尼斯特卫士。他们肩膀悬挂鲜红披风，头上顶着雄狮钢盔。但小指头果然信守诺言：在两侧墙边，在劳勃那些描绘狩猎和战争的壁毯下，挺立着金披风的都城守卫队，他们每个人手里都紧握着黑铁枪尖的八尺长矛，做好了一切准备，人数则足足是兰尼斯特士兵的五倍。
Joffrey stood. His red satin cape was patterned in gold thread; fifty roaring lions to one side, fifty prancing stags to the other. “I command the council to make all the necessary arrangements for my coronation,” the boy proclaimed. “I wish to be crowned within the fortnight. Today I shall accept oaths of fealty from my loyal councillors.”
当奈德停下脚步，他的断腿已经痛得难以忍受，只好一手搭着小指头的肩膀稳住身子。
Ned produced Robert’s letter. “Lord Varys, be so kind as to show this to my lady of Lannister.”
乔佛里站起来。他的红缎披风绣了金线，一边是五十只怒吼雄狮，另一边则是五十只跳跃公鹿。“我命令御前会议全速准备我的加冕仪式，”男孩宣布，“我希望在两周内完成加冕。今天我要接受朝廷重臣的宣誓效命。”
The eunuch carried the letter to Cersei. The queen glanced at the words. “Protector of the Realm,” she read. “Is this meant to be your shield, my lord? A piece of paper?” She ripped the letter in half, ripped the halves in quarters, and let the pieces flutter to the floor.
奈德取出劳勃的信。“瓦里斯大人，有劳您将这封信拿给兰尼斯特家族的夫人。”
“Those were the king’s words,” Ser Barristan said, shocked.
太监把信递给瑟曦，王后瞄了一眼。“全境守护者，”她念道，“大人，您想拿这当挡箭牌吗？就区区一张纸？”她将纸撕成两半，再撕成四片，碎片散落一地。
“We have a new king now,” Cersei Lannister replied. “Lord Eddard, when last we spoke, you gave me some counsel. Allow me to return the courtesy. Bend the knee, my lord. Bend the knee and swear fealty to my son, and we shall allow you to step down as Hand and live out your days in the grey waste you call home.”
“那是国王的遗嘱啊。”巴利斯坦爵士骇然。
“Would that I could,” Ned said grimly. If she was so determined to force the issue here and now, she left him no choice. “Your son has no claim to the throne he sits. Lord Stannis is Robert’s true heir.”
“我们有了新国王。”瑟曦·兰尼斯特说，“艾德大人，上次我们见面，您给了我一些建议，现在让我也回个礼。跪下，大人。只要您下跪宣誓效忠我儿子，我们就准许您卸下首相职务，回到那片您称之为家的灰色荒原安享晚年。”
“Liar!” Joffrey screamed, his face reddening.
“我倒期望如此。”奈德冷冷地说。既然她执意在此时此地做个了断，那他别无选择。“但你儿子无权继承王位。史坦尼斯大人才是劳勃合法的继承人。”
“Mother, what does he mean?” Princess Myrcella asked the queen plaintively. “Isn’t Joff the king now?”
“你骗人！”乔佛里满脸通红地尖叫。
“You condemn yourself with your own mouth, Lord Stark,” said Cersei Lannister. “Ser Barristan, seize this traitor.”
“母亲，他这话什么意思？”弥赛拉公主一脸哀怨地问王后。“小乔现在不是国王了吗？”
The Lord Commander of the Kingsguard hesitated. In the blink of an eye he was surrounded by Stark guardsmen, bare steel in their mailed fists.
“史塔克大人，你这是自寻死路。”瑟曦·兰尼斯特道，“巴利斯坦爵士，拿下这个叛徒。”
“And now the treason moves from words to deeds,” Cersei said. “Do you think Ser Barristan stands alone, my lord?” With an ominous rasp of metal on metal, the Hound drew his longsword. The knights of the Kingsguard and twenty Lannister guardsmen in crimson cloaks moved to support him.
御林铁卫队长迟疑了片刻，只一眨眼功夫，他便被拔出武器的史塔克卫士团团围住。
“Kill him!” the boy king screamed down from the Iron Throne. “Kill all of them, I command it!”
“我看你不只是嘴上说说，而是迫不及待要抢位夺权了。”瑟曦道，“大人，你以为巴利斯坦爵士孤军奋战吗？”随着一声充满不祥暗示的金属碰撞，猎狗抽出了长剑。其余的御林铁卫和二十名兰尼斯特卫士也同时前进。
“You leave me no choice,” Ned told Cersei Lannister. He called out to Janos Slynt. “Commander, take the queen and her children into custody. Do them no harm, but escort them back to the royal apartments and keep them there, under guard.”
“杀了他！”铁王座上的男孩国王扯着喉咙尖叫，“把他们通通给我杀掉！”
“Men of the Watch!” Janos Slynt shouted, donning his helm. A hundred gold cloaks leveled their spears and closed.
“你让我别无选择。”奈德告诉瑟曦·兰尼斯特。他召唤杰诺斯·史林特，“司令，请您暂时拘捕王后和她的孩子，但不得加以伤害。将他们送回王家居室，并派人加以看守。”
“I want no bloodshed,” Ned told the queen. “Tell your men to lay down their swords, and no one need—”
“都城守卫队！”杰诺斯·史林特高叫，一边戴上头盔。一百名金披风卫士放低长枪，朝他们靠拢。
With a single sharp thrust, the nearest gold cloak drove his spear into Tomard’s back. Fat Tom’s blade dropped from nerveless fingers as the wet red point burst out through his ribs, piercing leather and mail. He was dead before his sword hit the floor.
“我不希望无谓的流血冲突，”奈德告诉王后，“叫你的手下放下武器，就无须——”
Ned’s shout came far too late. Janos Slynt himself slashed open Varly’s throat. Cayn whirled, steel flashing, drove back the nearest spearman with a flurry of blows; for an instant it looked as though he might cut his way free. Then the Hound was on him. Sandor Clegane’s first cut took off Cayn’s sword hand at the wrist; his second drove him to his knees and opened him from shoulder to breastbone.
一记利落的突刺，离得最近的都城守卫将长枪戳进托马德的背脊。胖汤姆的剑从绵软无力的手中滑落，鲜血淋漓的枪尖自肋骨下刺出，穿透皮革背心和盔甲。剑未落地，人已丧命。
As his men died around him, Littlefinger slid Ned’s dagger from its sheath and shoved it up under his chin. His smile was apologetic. “I did warn you not to trust me, you know.”
奈德的叫喊来得太迟。史林特亲自斩开瓦利的咽喉。凯恩旋身挥剑，绽起一片剑光，逼退身旁的枪兵。刹那间他仿佛就要突围而出，这时却来了猎狗。桑铎·克里冈第一剑砍断凯恩的右手腕，第二剑将他从肩膀至胸骨活活劈开。凯恩当场气绝身亡。
