*CATELYN
“雷加王子的女儿雷妮丝公主不也是个孩子？她是个讨人喜欢的小宝贝，年纪比您两个女儿都要小。您可知道，她养了一只小黑猫，名叫贝勒里恩？到现在我始终不知道那只猫的下落。雷妮丝老爱把它当作真正的黑死神贝勒里恩。不过呢，我想在兰尼斯特军撞开她房门那天，他们很快就让她知道小猫和飞龙之间的差异了罢。”瓦里斯疲倦地一声长叹，仿佛肩负着全世界的哀伤。“总主教大人曾对我说，因为我们有罪，所以我们受苦。假如这是真的，艾德大人，请告诉我……为何在你们这些王公贵族的权力游戏里面，永远是无辜的人受苦最多？您愿意的话，就在王后到来之前，好好想一想罢。除此之外，更请您想清楚：下一个来探访您的人可能带着面包乳酪，以及减轻痛苦的罂粟花奶……却也可能带着珊莎的项上人头。”
A s the host trooped down the causeway through the black bogs of the Neck and spilled out into the riverlands beyond, Catelyn’s apprehensions grew. She masked her fears behind a face kept still and stern, yet they were there all the same, growing with every league they crossed. Her days were anxious, her nights restless, and every raven that flew overhead made her clench her teeth.
“要选哪一种呢，亲爱的首相大人，完完全全看您的决定了。”
She feared for her lord father, and wondered at his ominous silence. She feared for her brother Edmure, and prayed that the gods would watch over him if he must face the Kingslayer in battle. She feared for Ned and her girls, and for the sweet sons she had left behind at Winterfell. And yet there was nothing she could do for any of them, and so she made herself put all thought of them aside. You must save your strength for Robb , she told herself. He is the only one you can help. You must be as fierce and hard as the north, Catelyn Tully. You must be a Stark for true now, like your son .
第六十章 凯特琳
Robb rode at the front of the column, beneath the flapping white banner of Winterfell. Each day he would ask one of his lords to join him, so they might confer as they marched; he honored every man in turn, showing no favorites, listening as his lord father had listened, weighing the words of one against the other. He has learned so much from Ned , she thought as she watched him, but has he learned enough?
眼看部队沿堤道穿过颈泽的黑色沼地，涌进彼方的河间地区，凯特琳的忧虑与日俱增。虽然她将恐惧埋藏在沉着冷静的面具之下，但它依旧存在，并随着他们跨越的每一里格不断增长。白天她焦虑不安，晚上则辗转反侧，每一只飞过头顶的渡鸦，都令她不禁咬紧牙关。
The Blackfish had taken a hundred picked men and a hundred swift horses and raced ahead to screen their movements and scout the way. The reports Ser Brynden’s riders brought back did little to reassure her. Lord Tywin’s host was still many days to the south … but Walder Frey, Lord of the Crossing, had assembled a force of near four thousand men at his castles on the Green Fork.
她为父亲恐惧，对他的缄默大惑不解。她为弟弟艾德慕恐惧，并暗自祈求，倘若他必须与弑君者在战场上相见，请天上诸神务必看护他。她更为奈德和两个女儿，为那两个她丢在临冬城不管的乖儿子恐惧。然而，她对他们每一个人都无能为力，于是她逼迫自己将这些念头统统抛到脑后。你必须将力量留给罗柏，她这么对自己说，他是你惟一帮得上忙的人。凯特琳·徒利，现在的你，必须像北方一样坚毅刚强，必须成为一个名符其实的史塔克家人，像你的儿子一样。
“Late again,” Catelyn murmured when she heard. It was the Trident all over, damn the man. Her brother Edmure had called the banners; by rights, Lord Frey should have gone to join the Tully host at Riverrun, yet here he sat.
罗柏骑马走在队伍最前面，临冬城的白色旗帜在他头顶迎风飘扬。每天，他都会请一位封臣与他同行，借此机会讨论战略；他轮流邀请每一位诸侯，丝毫没有表现出个人好恶，像他的父亲一样用心聆听对方意见，仔细衡量每种说法。他从奈德那里学了好多，她看着他，心里想着，可他学够了吗？
“Four thousand men,” Robb repeated, more perplexed than angry. “Lord Frey cannot hope to fight the Lannisters by himself. Surely he means to join his power to ours.”
黑鱼精挑细选出一百个人和一百匹好马，当先到前方掩蔽他们的行踪，并执行侦察任务。而布林登爵士的部下回报的消息，丝毫未能纾解她的忧虑。泰温大人的部队虽与他们仍有相当距离……但河渡口领主瓦德·佛雷却已在他绿叉河畔的城堡聚集了近四千的兵力。
“Does he?” Catelyn asked. She had ridden forward to join Robb and Robett Glover, his companion of the day. The vanguard spread out behind them, a slow-moving forest of lances and banners and spears. “I wonder. Expect nothing of Walder Frey, and you will never be surprised.”
“又迟到了。”凯特琳得知消息时，不禁喃喃自语。这人真该遭天谴，眼下简直是当年三叉戟河之战的翻版。她的弟弟艾德慕既已召集封臣，照说佛雷侯爵早该率兵前往奔流城加入徒利大军，结果他却按兵不动。
“He’s your father’s bannerman.”
“四千人，”罗柏复诵了一遍，话中有些恼火，更有困惑。“佛雷大人绝不可能单独对付兰尼斯特军，所以他一定打算加入我们。”
“Some men take their oaths more seriously than others, Robb. And Lord Walder was always friendlier with Casterly Rock than my father would have liked. One of his sons is wed to Tywin Lannister’s sister. That means little of itself, to be sure. Lord Walder has sired a great many children over the years, and they must needs marry someone. Still …”
“是吗？”凯特琳反问。她骑到队伍前方，与罗柏和他今天的同伴罗贝特·葛洛佛同行。先锋军散开跟在他们身后，犹如一座由枪戟、旗帜和长矛组成的森林，缓缓移动。“我可不敢说。决不要对瓦德·佛雷抱任何期望，到时候你就不会觉得意外。”
“Do you think he means to betray us to the Lannisters, my lady?” Robett Glover asked gravely.
“可他是外公的封臣。”
Catelyn sighed. “If truth be told, I doubt even Lord Frey knows what Lord Frey intends to do. He has an old man’s caution and a young man’s ambition, and has never lacked for cunning.”
“罗柏，不是每个人都把自己立下的誓言当回事的，更何况瓦德大人与凯岩城的友好程度，向来令你外公不满。他有一个儿子就是娶了泰温·兰尼斯特的妹妹，虽说这算不了什么，瓦德大人膝下儿孙满堂，他们总是得结婚的。不过……”
“We must have the Twins, Mother,” Robb said heatedly. “There is no other way across the river. You know that.”
“夫人，您认为他打算把我们出卖给兰尼斯特？”罗贝特·葛洛佛语气沉重地问。
“Yes. And so does Walder Frey, you can be sure of that.”
凯特琳叹道：“说真的，我怀疑佛雷大人自己都不确定有何打算。他既有老人家的行事谨慎，又有年轻人的野心勃勃，更不缺精打细算。”
That night they made camp on the southern edge of the bogs, halfway between the kingsroad and the river. It was there Theon Greyjoy brought them further word from her uncle. “Ser Brynden says to tell you he’s crossed swords with the Lannisters. There are a dozen scouts who won’t be reporting back to Lord Tywin anytime soon. Or ever.” He grinned. “Ser Addam Marbrand commands their outriders, and he’s pulling back south, burning as he goes. He knows where we are, more or less, but the Blackfish vows he will not know when we split.”
“母亲，我们一定要得到孪河城的支持。”罗柏的口气有些冲，“你也知道，除此之外无处可以渡河。”
“Unless Lord Frey tells him,” Catelyn said sharply. “Theon, when you return to my uncle, tell him he is to place his best bowmen around the Twins, day and night, with orders to bring down any raven they see leaving the battlements. I want no birds bringing word of my son’s movements to Lord Tywin.”
“没错，而且你大可放心，瓦德·佛雷也很清楚。”
“Ser Brynden has seen to it already, my lady,” Theon replied with a cocky smile. “A few more blackbirds, and we should have enough to bake a pie. I’ll save you their feathers for a hat.”
当晚，他们在沼泽的南界扎营，正好在国王大道和河流中间。席恩·葛雷乔伊便是在此为他们带来她叔叔的新情报。“布林登爵士要我告诉你们，他已经和兰尼斯特军发生了遭遇战。有十来个斥候大概暂时不会回去跟泰温大人报告了，我看他们永远也回不去了。”他嘻嘻笑道，“负责指挥敌军侦察部队的是亚当·马尔布兰爵士，他正掉头往南，沿途到处放火。他约略知道我们的位置，但黑鱼发誓绝不让他知道我们何时兵分两路。”
She ought to have known that Brynden Blackfish would be well ahead of her. “What have the Freys been doing while the Lannisters burn their fields and plunder their holdfasts?”
“除非佛雷大人告诉他。”凯特琳语气尖锐，“席恩，你回去之后，请我叔叔将手下最厉害的弓箭手布置在孪河城四周，日夜监视，一旦有渡鸦出城，立刻将其射下，我不希望有任何飞鸟将我儿的动向报告给泰温大人。”
“There’s been some fighting between Ser Addam’s men and Lord Walder’s,” Theon answered. “Not a day’s ride from here, we found two Lannister scouts feeding the crows where the Freys had strung them up. Most of Lord Walder’s strength remains massed at the Twins, though.”
“夫人，布林登大人早已这么办了。”席恩带着一抹得意的笑容回答，“再多几只黑鸟，我们都可以拿来做馅饼了。我会把羽毛留下来给您做顶帽子的。”
That bore Walder Frey’s seal beyond a doubt, Catelyn thought bitterly; hold back, wait, watch, take no risk unless forced to it.
她早该想到，黑鱼布林登的考虑远比自己周详。“既然兰尼斯特军纵火焚烧佛雷家族的田地，掠夺他们的农舍，那他们有何反应？”
“If he’s been fighting the Lannisters, perhaps he does mean to hold to his vows,” Robb said.
“亚当爵士和瓦德大人双方的部队有过遭遇战，”席恩回答，“距此不到一日骑程，我们发现两个兰尼斯特斥候被佛雷家士兵绑起来喂乌鸦。当然，瓦德大人绝大多数兵力集结在孪河城。”
Catelyn was less encouraged. “Defending his own lands is one thing, open battle against Lord Tywin quite another.”
按兵不动，静观其变，不明动态，绝不出手，这真是瓦德·佛雷的不改作风，凯特琳苦涩地想。
Robb turned back to Theon Greyjoy. “Has the Blackfish found any other way across the Green Fork?”
“既然他已和兰尼斯特军开战，或许他的确有意遵守誓言。”罗柏道。
Theon shook his head. “The river’s running high and fast. Ser Brynden says it can’t be forded, not this far north.”
凯特琳可没那么乐观。“保护自己的领地是一回事，公然与泰温大人作战又是另一回事。”
“I must have that crossing!” Robb declared, fuming. “Oh, our horses might be able to swim the river, I suppose, but not with armored men on their backs. We’d need to build rafts to pole our steel across, helms and mail and lances, and we don’t have the trees for that. Or the time. Lord Tywin is marching north …” He balled his hand into a fist.
罗柏转头对席恩·葛雷乔伊说：“黑鱼有没有发现其他渡过绿叉河的方法？”
“Lord Frey would be a fool to try and bar our way,” Theon Greyjoy said with his customary easy confidence. “We have five times his numbers. You can take the Twins if you need to, Robb.”
席恩摇摇头。“现在水位很高，水流又湍急，布林登爵士说在这么上游的地方是不可能渡河的。”
“Not easily,” Catelyn warned them, “and not in time. While you were mounting your siege, Tywin Lannister would bring up his host and assault you from the rear.”
“我非渡河不可！”罗柏火冒三丈，“唉，我们的马或许可以游泳，但驮着全副武装的人可不行。我们得建造木筏，把头盔、铠甲和长枪等兵器运过去，可我们不但没有木头，更没有时间。泰温大人已经往北来了……”他握紧拳头。
Robb glanced from her to Greyjoy, searching for an answer and finding none. For a moment he looked even younger than his fifteen years, despite his mail and sword and the stubble on his cheeks. “What would my lord father do?” he asked her.
“佛雷大人若想阻拦我们，那是自寻死路。”席恩·葛雷乔伊以他一贯的自信口吻说，“我们的兵力足足是他五倍，罗柏，如果必要，你可以轻易拿下孪河城。”
“Find a way across,” she told him. “Whatever it took.”
“恐怕不容易，”凯特琳警告他们，“至少绝非短时间内可以攻下。当你们还在架设攻城器械的时候，泰温·兰尼斯特便会带着大军从后掩杀而来。”
The next morning it was Ser Brynden Tully himself who rode back to them. He had put aside the heavy plate and helm he’d worn as the Knight of the Gate for the lighter leather-and-mail of an outrider, but his obsidian fish still fastened his cloak.
罗柏看看她，又看看葛雷乔伊，想要找寻答案，但徒劳无功。一时之间，他虽然披甲带剑，两颊又留了短须，看起来却比十五岁还要年幼。“父亲会怎么做？”他问她。
Her uncle’s face was grave as he swung down off his horse. “There has been a battle under the walls of Riverrun,” he said, his mouth grim. “We had it from a Lannister outrider we took captive. The Kingslayer has destroyed Edmure’s host and sent the lords of the Trident reeling in flight.”
“想办法过河，”她告诉他，“用尽一切方法。”
A cold hand clutched at Catelyn’s heart. “And my brother?”
翌日清晨，布林登·徒利爵士亲自骑马回报，他已经卸下血门骑士的重铠和头盔，换上轻便的斥候皮甲，但那条黑曜石雕的鱼依旧扣住披风。
“Wounded and taken prisoner,” Ser Brynden said. “Lord Blackwood and the other survivors are under siege inside Riverrun, surrounded by Jaime’s host.”
叔叔脸色沉重地翻身下马。“奔流城下有一场战事，”他抿抿嘴，“我们是从一个被俘的兰尼斯特斥候口中听说的。弑君者歼灭了艾德慕的军队，把三河诸侯打得四散奔逃。”
Robb looked fretful. “We must get across this accursed river if we’re to have any hope of relieving them in time.”
一只冰冷的手攫住了凯特琳的心。“我弟弟怎样？”
“That will not be easily done,” her uncle cautioned. “Lord Frey has pulled his whole strength back inside his castles, and his gates are closed and barred.”
“受伤被俘，”布林登爵士道，“布莱伍德大人和其他生还者被困在奔流城里，詹姆的大军将他们团团包围。”
“Damn the man,” Robb swore. “If the old fool does not relent and let me cross, he’ll leave me no choice but to storm his walls. I’ll pull the Twins down around his ears if I have to, we’ll see how well he likes that!”
罗柏一脸焦躁。“我们得赶紧渡过这条该死的河，否则就来不及了。”
“You sound like a sulky boy, Robb,” Catelyn said sharply. “A child sees an obstacle, and his first thought is to run around it or knock it down. A lord must learn that sometimes words can accomplish what swords cannot.”
“恐怕不容易，”叔叔告诫他，“佛雷大人所有的兵力现下都在城里，城门却是紧紧关闭。”
Robb’s neck reddened at the rebuke. “Tell me what you mean, Mother,” he said meekly.
“这家伙该死，”罗柏咒道，“如果这老王八蛋不肯让我过去，我别无选择，非得攻城不可，待我们把孪河城拆个一干二净，瞧他喜不喜欢！”
“The Freys have held the crossing for six hundred years, and for six hundred years they have never failed to exact their toll.”
“罗柏，你的话听起来活像个赌气的小孩。”凯特琳口气锐利地说，“小孩子一遇阻碍，不是想绕过去，就是想把它推倒。作为一方领主，你得清楚言语有时候可以解决武力所办不到的事。”
“What toll? What does he want?”
听她责备，罗柏从脸孔红到脖子。“母亲，请您告诉我您的意见。”他口气温顺地说。
She smiled. “That is what we must discover.”
“佛雷家族把守渡口已经六百年，六百年来，他们从来不忘收取过桥费。”
“And what if I do not choose to pay this toll?”
“过桥费？他到底想怎样？”
“Then you had best retreat back to Moat Cailin, deploy to meet Lord Tywin in battle … or grow wings. I see no other choices.” Catelyn put her heels to her horse and rode off, leaving her son to ponder her words. It would not do to make him feel as if his mother were usurping his place. Did you teach him wisdom as well as valor, Ned? she wondered. Did you teach him how to kneel? The graveyards of the Seven Kingdoms were full of brave men who had never learned that lesson.
她微笑道：“这就轮到我们去发现了。”
It was near midday when their vanguard came in sight of the Twins, where the Lords of the Crossing had their seat.
“假如我不打算付过桥费呢？”
The Green Fork ran swift and deep here, but the Freys had spanned it many centuries past and grown rich off the coin men paid them to cross. Their bridge was a massive arch of smooth grey rock, wide enough for two wagons to pass abreast; the Water Tower rose from the center of the span, commanding both road and river with its arrow slits, murder holes, and portcullises. It had taken the Freys three generations to complete their bridge; when they were done they’d thrown up stout timber keeps on either bank, so no one might cross without their leave.
“那么你最好退回卡林湾，布好阵势迎接泰温大人……不然就是长出翅膀。我看没别的方法。”凯特琳轻踢马肚，向前奔去，让儿子留下来思索她的话。若是让他觉得母亲在抢夺他的权位，那可不成。奈德，除了勇气之外，你可有教导他智慧？她暗想，你可有教导他如何低头？七大王国的坟墓里多的是徒有勇武，却不知该何时低头的人。
The timber had long since given way to stone. The Twins—two squat, ugly, formidable castles, identical in every respect, with the bridge arching between—had guarded the crossing for centuries. High curtain walls, deep moats, and heavy oak-and-iron gates protected the approaches, the bridge footings rose from within stout inner keeps, there was a barbican and portcullis on either bank, and the Water Tower defended the span itself.
日近正午，孪河城进入先锋部队的视线，此地便是河渡口领主的根据地。
One glance was sufficient to tell Catelyn that the castle would not be taken by storm. The battlements bristled with spears and swords and scorpions, there was an archer at every crenel and arrow slit, the drawbridge was up, the portcullis down, the gates closed and barred.
这里的绿叉河水既深且急，但佛雷家族的势力早在几世纪前便横跨两岸，并靠着渡河者缴纳的费用致富。他们建造的通道是一座巨大的平滑灰石拱桥，宽度足以让两部马车并眉而行；卫河塔矗立于弧桥中央，以其射箭孔、杀人洞和铁闸门睥睨河流和道路。佛雷家花了三代才完成这座拱桥，竣工之后，他们在两岸都筑起木头堡垒，如此一来，任何人若未经他们允许，都不能过河。
The Greatjon began to curse and swear as soon as he saw what awaited them. Lord Rickard Karstark glowered in silence. “That cannot be assaulted, my lords,” Roose Bolton announced.
如今木头早已改为石材，孪河城——两座方正、丑陋却坚固的城堡，两边的样貌几乎完全相同，拱桥则横越其间——已经守护渡口几世纪之久。它有着高耸的域墙，深深的护城河和厚重的橡木镶铁门。桥的两边入口均位于防护严密的内城，两岸有桥头堡和铁闸门，河中央则由卫河塔保护。
“Nor can we take it by siege, without an army on the far bank to invest the other castle,” Helman Tallhart said gloomily. Across the deep-running green waters, the western twin stood like a reflection of its eastern brother. “Even if we had the time. Which, to be sure, we do not.”
凯特琳只需一眼，便看出面前的城堡无法迅速攻陷。城墙上处处是枪剑光影和大型弓弩，每个雉堞和箭口皆有弓箭手部署，吊桥已经升起，闸门也已降下。城门紧闭，扣上门闩。
As the northern lords studied the castle, a sally port opened, a plank bridge slid across the moat, and a dozen knights rode forth to confront them, led by four of Lord Walder’s many sons. Their banner bore twin towers, dark blue on a field of pale silver-grey. Ser Stevron Frey, Lord Walder’s heir, spoke for them. The Freys all looked like weasels; Ser Stevron, past sixty with grandchildren of his own, looked like an especially old and tired weasel, yet he was polite enough. “My lord father has sent me to greet you, and inquire as to who leads this mighty host.”
大琼恩一见，立即开始高声咒骂。瑞卡德·卡史塔克伯爵则静静地怒视。“诸位大人，这样的城堡无法在短时间内攻下。”卢斯·波顿表示。
“I do.” Robb spurred his horse forward. He was in his armor, with the direwolf shield of Winterfell strapped to his saddle and Grey Wind padding by his side.
“若我们在对岸没有军队，就算包围也不行，”赫曼·陶哈郁闷地说。深流奔涌的绿水对岸，河西城堡有如其东边兄弟的倒影。“即使时间充裕也没办法，而我们的时间可是一点也不充裕。”
The old knight looked at her son with a faint flicker of amusement in his watery grey eyes, though his gelding whickered uneasily and sidled away from the direwolf. “My lord father would be most honored if you would share meat and mead with him in the castle and explain your purpose here.”
正当北方诸侯观察城堡时，一扇边门突然打开，伸出一座木板桥跨越护城河，十来个骑士朝他们而来。他们由瓦德侯爵的四个儿子率领，打着银灰色底、深蓝双塔的旗帜。史提夫伦·瓦德爵士，瓦德侯爵的继承人，代表他们发言。佛雷家的人个个看起来像黄鼠狼；年过六旬，自己都有孙子的史提夫伦爵士，看起来尤其像只年老而疲惫的黄鼠狼，不过他到底还颇有礼貌。“家父派我前来问候诸位，敢问率领这支劲旅的是何许人？”
His words crashed among the lords bannermen like a great stone from a catapult. Not one of them approved. They cursed, argued, shouted down each other.
“是我。”罗柏催马上前。他全身铠甲，临冬城的冰原狼徽盾系在马鞍，灰风轻步跟在身边。
“You must not do this, my lord,” Galbart Glover pleaded with Robb. “Lord Walder is not to be trusted.”
老骑士水汪汪的灰眼里闪现出一抹兴味，但他的坐骑却不安地哼了两声，避开了冰原狼。“如您愿意到城里与家父共进晚餐，表明您的来意，相信他必定大感荣幸。”
Roose Bolton nodded. “Go in there alone and you’re his. He can sell you to the Lannisters, throw you in a dungeon, or slit your throat, as he likes.”
他的这番话，有如投石机射出的巨石，在北境诸侯中炸裂开来。众人均大为不满，他们或咒骂，或争执，彼此大呼小叫。
“If he wants to talk to us, let him open his gates, and we will all share his meat and mead,” declared Ser Wendel Manderly.
“大人，您千万不能去，”盖伯特·葛洛佛向罗柏陈情。“绝不能信任瓦德大人。”
“Or let him come out and treat with Robb here, in plain sight of his men and ours,” suggested his brother, Ser Wylis.
卢斯·波顿点点头。“单身赴约，您就是任他宰割。他可以把您卖给兰尼斯特，把您丢进地牢，甚或割了您喉咙，一切随他高兴。”
Catelyn Stark shared all their doubts, but she had only to glance at Ser Stevron to see that he was not pleased by what he was hearing. A few more words and the chance would be lost. She had to act, and quickly. “I will go ,” she said loudly.
“如果他想跟我们谈谈，叫他打开城门，让我们全体进去与他共进晚餐。”文德尔·曼德勒爵士高声宣布。
“You, my lady?” The Greatjon furrowed his brow.
“干脆要他出来，就在这里宴请罗柏，当着双方所有人的面。”他的哥哥威里斯爵士提议。
“Mother, are you certain?” Clearly, Robb was not.
凯特琳·史塔克与他们同感疑虑，但她只瞄了史提夫伦爵士一眼，便看出他对所见所闻甚感不悦，只要再多几句，机会就会稍纵即逝。她必须采取行动，越快越好。“让我去。”她高声说。
“Never more,” Catelyn lied glibly. “Lord Walder is my father’s bannerman. I have known him since I was a girl. He would never offer me any harm.” Unless he saw some profit in it , she added silently, but some truths did not bear saying, and some lies were necessary.
“夫人，您去？”大琼恩皱起眉头。
“I am certain my lord father would be pleased to speak to the Lady Catelyn,” Ser Stevron said. “To vouchsafe for our good intentions, my brother Ser Perwyn will remain here until she is safely returned to you.”
“母亲，您确定吗？”显然，罗柏并不确定。
“He shall be our honored guest,” said Robb. Ser Perwyn, the youngest of the four Freys in the party, dismounted and handed the reins of his horse to a brother. “I require my lady mother’s return by evenfall, Ser Stevron,” Robb went on. “It is not my intent to linger here long.”
“我当然确定，”凯特琳伶俐地撒谎，“瓦德大人是我父亲的封臣，我从小就认识他，他绝对不会对我怎么样的。”除非有利可图，她在心里暗暗注明，但有些事情不能明讲，有些谎言也是必须。
Ser Stevron Frey gave a polite nod. “As you say, my lord.” Catelyn spurred her horse forward and did not look back. Lord Walder’s sons and envoys fell in around her.
“相信家父一定乐于和凯特琳夫人谈谈，”史提夫伦爵士道。“为了保证我们并无不良企图，我弟弟派温爵士会留在这里，直到夫人您安全归来为止。”
Her father had once said of Walder Frey that he was the only lord in the Seven Kingdoms who could field an army out of his breeches. When the Lord of the Crossing welcomed Catelyn in the great hall of the east castle, surrounded by twenty living sons (minus Ser Perwyn, who would have made twenty-one), thirty-six grandsons, nineteen great-grandsons, and numerous daughters, granddaughters, bastards, and grandbastards, she understood just what he had meant.
“而我们将待之如上宾。”罗柏说。派温爵士是佛雷家四兄弟中最年轻的一位，他下了马，把缰绳交给哥哥。“史提夫伦爵士，我希望家母能在日落时归来，”罗柏继续说，“我不愿在此逗留。”
Lord Walder was ninety, a wizened pink weasel with a bald spotted head, too gouty to stand unassisted. His newest wife, a pale frail girl of sixteen years, walked beside his litter when they carried him in. She was the eighth Lady Frey.
史提夫伦·佛雷爵士礼貌地点头：“大人，照您吩咐。”凯特琳轻踢马刺，向前奔去，没有回头。瓦德侯爵的儿子和护卫们随即跟上。
“It is a great pleasure to see you again after so many years, my lord,” Catelyn said.
父亲曾说，放眼七大王国，瓦德·佛雷是惟一能自己生出一支军队的领主。当天，河渡口侯爵在河东城堡的大厅里欢迎凯特琳时，他身边围绕着二十个活着的儿子（这不包括派温爵士，加上他就成了二十一个），三十六个孙子，十九个曾孙，以及许多女儿、孙女、私生子、私生女，和私生孙子孙女。她终于明白父亲是什么意思。
The old man squinted at her suspiciously. “Is it? I doubt that. Spare me your sweet words, Lady Catelyn, I am too old. Why are you here? Is your boy too proud to come before me himself? What am I to do with you?”
瓦德侯爵今年九十，活像条干瘪的粉红色黄鼠狼，头早已光秃，上面遍布老人斑，因为痛风的关系，若无人搀扶，就没法站立。他最新一任妻子是个十六岁的女孩，苍白瘦弱，跟在他担架旁边走进来。她是第八任佛雷夫人。
Catelyn had been a girl the last time she had visited the Twins, but even then Lord Walder had been irascible, sharp of tongue, and blunt of manner. Age had made him worse than ever, it would seem. She would need to choose her words with care, and do her best to take no offense from his.
“大人，多年不见，今日重逢，真是倍感喜悦。”凯特琳道。
“Father,” Ser Stevron said reproachfully, “you forget yourself. Lady Stark is here at your invitation.”
老人满腹狐疑地眯眼盯着她。“是么？我倒很怀疑。凯特琳夫人，我年纪大了，你就省省这些甜言蜜语吧。为什么是你在这里？难道说你家儿子太尊贵，不愿亲自来见我？我又该拿你怎么办呢？”
“Did I ask you? You are not Lord Frey yet, not until I die. Do I look dead? I’ll hear no instructions from you.”
凯特琳上次造访孪河城，还是个小女孩，当时的瓦德侯爵便已经是个脾气暴躁，语气尖刻且无甚礼貌的人，看来岁月使他更令人难以忍受了。她的措辞必须格外谨慎，尽全力不去在意他的言语冒犯。
“This is no way to speak in front of our noble guest, Father,” one of his younger sons said.
“父亲，”史提夫伦爵士语带责备地说，“您忘了吗？凯特琳夫人正是受您之邀而来。”
“Now my bastards presume to teach me courtesy,” Lord Walder complained. “I’ll speak any way I like, damn you. I’ve had three kings to guest in my life, and queens as well, do you think I require lessons from the likes of you, Ryger? Your mother was milking goats the first time I gave her my seed.” He dismissed the red-faced youth with a flick of his fingers and gestured to two of his other sons. “Danwell, Whalen, help me to my chair.”
“我在问你吗？我还没死，你就不是佛雷侯爵。我看起来像死人吗？我用不着听你说教。”
They shifted Lord Walder from his litter and carried him to the high seat of the Freys, a tall chair of black oak whose back was carved in the shape of two towers linked by a bridge. His young wife crept up timidly and covered his legs with a blanket. When he was settled, the old man beckoned Catelyn forward and planted a papery dry kiss on her hand. “There,” he announced. “Now that I have observed the courtesies, my lady, perhaps my sons will do me the honor of shutting their mouths. Why are you here?”
“父亲大人，这不是待客之道吧？”他另一个年纪较轻的儿子说。
“To ask you to open your gates, my lord,” Catelyn replied politely. “My son and his lords bannermen are most anxious to cross the river and be on their way.”
“这会儿连我的私生子都教训起我来啦？”瓦德侯爵抱怨，“你们都该死，我爱说什么便说什么。莱格，我这辈子招待过三个国王，王后就不用提了，你觉得我还用你教我‘待客之道’？我第一次在你妈身上播种的时候，她还在牧羊咧。”他弹弹指头，赶走那面红耳赤的年轻人，然后又向另外两个儿子打了个手势。“丹威尔，惠伦，扶我到椅子坐下。”
“To Riverrun?” He sniggered. “Oh, no need to tell me, no need. I’m not blind yet. The old man can still read a map.”
他们把瓦德侯爵从担架上扶下来，搀他到佛雷家的高位坐下。那是一张黑橡木椅子，椅背雕成以桥相连的双城式样。他年轻的妻子怯生生地走过来，为他的双脚盖上毛毯。老人坐定之后，招手示意凯特琳上前，在她手掌印下一个干如纸张的吻。“喏，”他宣布，“夫人，我已经行过礼了，或许我的儿子们可以赏个脸，给我闭上嘴巴。请问你来此有何目的？”
“To Riverrun,” Catelyn confirmed. She saw no reason to deny it. “Where I might have expected to find you, my lord. You are still my father’s bannerman, are you not?”
“大人，我们想请您打开城门。”凯特彬彬有礼地回答，“我儿子和他的封臣正急着渡河上路。”
“Heh,” said Lord Walder, a noise halfway between a laugh and a grunt. “I called my swords, yes I did, here they are, you saw them on the walls. It was my intent to march as soon as all my strength was assembled. Well, to send my sons. I am well past marching myself, Lady Catelyn.” He looked around for likely confirmation and pointed to a tall, stooped man of fifty years. “Tell her, Jared. Tell her that was my intent.”
“去奔流城？”他窃笑一声，“喏，用不着告诉我，用不着。我的眼睛还没瞎，老人家照样可以看地图。”
“It was, my lady,” said Ser Jared Frey, one of his sons by his second wife. “On my honor.”
“去奔流城。”凯特琳证实。她不觉有何必要否认。“大人，我本以为会在那里见到您。您仍然是家父的臣属，是吧？”
“Is it my fault that your fool brother lost his battle before we could march?” He leaned back against his cushions and scowled at her, as if challenging her to dispute his version of events. “I am told the Kingslayer went through him like an axe through ripe cheese. Why should my boys hurry south to die? All those who did go south are running north again.”
“嘿，”瓦德侯爵道，他的声音介乎于冷笑和咕哝之间。“你也看到啦，城墙上那么多兵，还不都是我召集的？我打算等部队全体到齐之后，立刻就出发。当然啦，我的意思是派我儿子去，凯特琳夫人，我这身老骨头已经过了带兵打仗的年纪啰。”他环顾四周，仿佛在期待众人的肯定，接着他指指一位五十来岁，高大驼背的男子。“杰瑞，你告诉她，告诉她这的确是我的打算。”
Catelyn would gladly have spitted the querulous old man and roasted him over a fire, but she had only till evenfall to open the bridge. Calmly, she said, “All the more reason that we must reach Riverrun, and soon. Where can we go to talk, my lord?”
“夫人，的确是这样，”杰瑞·佛雷爵士道，他是第二任佛雷夫人所生的儿子。“我以我的名誉发誓。”
“We’re talking now,” Lord Frey complained. The spotted pink head snapped around. “What are you all looking at?” he shouted at his kin. “Get out of here. Lady Stark wants to speak to me in private. Might be she has designs on my fidelity, heh . Go, all of you, find something useful to do. Yes, you too, woman. Out, out, out.” As his sons and grandsons and daughters and bastards and nieces and nephews streamed from the hall, he leaned close to Catelyn and confessed, “They’re all waiting for me to die. Stevron’s been waiting for forty years, but I keep disappointing him. Heh . Why should I die just so he can be a lord? I ask you. I won’t do it.”
“你那蠢弟弟在我们动身之前就吃了败仗，难道说这是我的错？”他向后靠上背垫，皱眉看她，仿佛在等她质疑他的说词。“我听说弑君者把他打得落花流水，跟拿斧头切乳酪一样。我的儿子干嘛急着南下送死啊？到南方去的人现在不都慌着逃回来？”
“I have every hope that you will live to be a hundred.”
凯特琳真想朝这满腹牢骚的老头吐口水，然后把他架在火上烤，然而她只有黄昏之前这段时间来打开桥梁，于是她平静地说：“所以我们才更应该尽快赶到奔流城。大人，我们可否换个地方谈话？”
“That would boil them, to be sure. Oh, to be sure. Now, what do you want to say?”
“我们现在不就在谈？”佛雷侯爵抱怨。他那遍布老人斑的粉红秃头倏地一转。“你们看什么？”他朝周围的亲人吼，“还不快滚？史塔克夫人要跟我私下谈谈，搞不好她想让我出轨哩，嘿。你们通通都退下，去找点有用的事做。对，你也一样，臭女人，出去，出去，出去！”他的儿子、孙子、女儿、私生子、外孙、外孙女们鱼贯离开大厅，他则靠向凯特琳，坦白承认，“他们全部都在等我死，史提夫伦已经等了四十年啦，可我偏要教他失望。嘿，我干嘛提早上天，好让他继承爵位啊，你说是不是？我偏不要。”
“We want to cross,” Catelyn told him.
“我衷心希望您活到一百岁。”
“Oh, do you? That’s blunt. Why should I let you?”
“那可会叫他们七窍生烟，一定会的。好吧，你到底想谈什么？”
For a moment her anger flared. “If you were strong enough to climb your own battlements, Lord Frey, you would see that my son has twenty thousand men outside your walls.”
“我们想渡河。”凯特琳对他说。
“They’ll be twenty thousand fresh corpses when Lord Tywin gets here,” the old man shot back. “Don’t you try and frighten me, my lady. Your husband’s in some traitor’s cell under the Red Keep, your father’s sick, might be dying, and Jaime Lannister’s got your brother in chains. What do you have that I should fear? That son of yours? I’ll match you son for son, and I’ll still have eighteen when yours are all dead.”
“哦，是嘛？你说得轻巧，我为何放你们过去？”
“You swore an oath to my father,” Catelyn reminded him.
一时之间，她的怒意猛地冒上来。“佛雷大人，假如你还有力气爬上自己的城墙，你会看到城外有我儿子的两万精兵。”
He bobbed his head side to side, smiling. “Oh, yes, I said some words, but I swore oaths to the crown too, it seems to me. Joffrey’s the king now, and that makes you and your boy and all those fools out there no better than rebels. If I had the sense the gods gave a fish, I’d help the Lannisters boil you all.”
“等泰温大人到来，他们就会变成两万具活尸，”老人不甘示弱。“夫人，你少跟我来这套。你丈夫因叛国被关在红堡底下的牢房，你老爹卧病在床，弄不好快没气了，而詹姆·兰尼斯特又抓了你老弟，你拿什么来吓唬我？你那宝贝儿子吗？我可以跟你一个换一个，等你儿子死光了，我还剩下十八个。”
“Why don’t you?” she challenged him.
“你可是宣誓效忠于我父亲。”凯特琳提醒他。
Lord Walder snorted with disdain. “Lord Tywin the proud and splendid, Warden of the West, Hand of the King, oh, what a great man that one is, him and his gold this and gold that and lions here and lions there. I’ll wager you, he eats too many beans, he breaks wind just like me, but you’ll never hear him admit it, oh, no. What’s he got to be so puffed up about anyway? Only two sons, and one of them’s a twisted little monster. I’ll match him son for son, and I’ll still have nineteen and a half left when all of his are dead!” He cackled. “If Lord Tywin wants my help, he can bloody well ask for it.”
他的头左右摇摆，微微一笑：“呵，可不是吗，我发过誓，可我也宣誓效忠王室啊，依我看呢，这会儿既然乔佛里是国王了，你和你家小鬼，以及外面那群蠢蛋不就是叛徒嘛？对不对？这事连鱼都知道，我应该帮兰尼斯特把你们通通杀光。”
That was all Catelyn needed to hear. “I am asking for your help, my lord,” she said humbly. “And my father and my brother and my lord husband and my sons are asking with my voice.”
“那你为什么不帮他？”她质问他。
Lord Walder jabbed a bony finger at her face. “Save your sweet words, my lady. Sweet words I get from my wife. Did you see her? Sixteen she is, a little flower, and her honey’s only for me. I wager she gives me a son by this time next year. Perhaps I’ll make him heir, wouldn’t that boil the rest of them?”
瓦德侯爵不屑地哼了一声。“泰温大人，他可是个大人物哩，既是西境守护，又是御前首相，呵，多了不起，这样也是金子打的，那样又是狮子形状，心高气傲得很。我敢跟你打赌，他豆子吃多了，跟我一样会放屁，不过你甭想听他承认，想都别想。他在拽个什么劲咧？也不过两个儿子，其中一个还是畸形小怪物，我可以拿儿子跟他一个换一个，等他的都死光了，我还剩十九个半咧！”他咯咯笑道，“如果泰温大人需要我帮忙，他好歹可以问他妈的一声吧？”
“I’m certain she will give you many sons.”
凯特琳需要的就是这句。“大人，我现在就是请求您帮忙，”她谦卑地说，“我代表我父亲、我弟弟、我丈夫以及我儿子向您请求。”
His head bobbed up and down. “Your lord father did not come to the wedding. An insult, as I see it. Even if he is dying. He never came to my last wedding either. He calls me the Late Lord Frey, you know. Does he think I’m dead? I’m not dead, and I promise you, I’ll outlive him as I outlived his father. Your family has always pissed on me, don’t deny it, don’t lie, you know it’s true. Years ago, I went to your father and suggested a match between his son and my daughter. Why not? I had a daughter in mind, sweet girl, only a few years older than Edmure, but if your brother didn’t warm to her, I had others he might have had, young ones, old ones, virgins, widows, whatever he wanted. No, Lord Hoster would not hear of it. Sweet words he gave me, excuses, but what I wanted was to get rid of a daughter.
瓦德大人伸出一只干枯的手指指着她。“夫人，你省省这些甜言蜜语，甜言蜜语我听我老婆讲就够了。你见着她没有？才十六岁，像朵小花，她的花蜜可是只给我一个人喝哟。我敢打赌，明年这时候啊，她就会再给我添个儿子。说不定我就让他当我的继承人，你说这会不会把他们活活气死啊？”
“And your sister, that one, she’s full as bad. It was, oh, a year ago, no more, Jon Arryn was still the King’s Hand, and I went to the city to see my sons ride in the tourney. Stevron and Jared are too old for the lists now, but Danwell and Hosteen rode, Perwyn as well, and a couple of my bastards tried the melee. If I’d known how they’d shame me, I would never have troubled myself to make the journey. Why did I need to ride all that way to see Hosteen knocked off his horse by that Tyrell whelp? I ask you. The boy’s half his age, Ser Daisy they call him, something like that. And Danwell was unhorsed by a hedge knight! Some days I wonder if those two are truly mine. My third wife was a Crakehall, all of the Crakehall women are sluts. Well, never mind about that, she died before you were born, what do you care?
“我相信她一定会给您添许多儿子的。”
“I was speaking of your sister. I proposed that Lord and Lady Arryn foster two of my grandsons at court, and offered to take their own son to ward here at the Twins. Are my grandsons unworthy to be seen at the king’s court? They are sweet boys, quiet and mannerly. Walder is Merrett’s son, named after me, and the other one … heh , I don’t recall … he might have been another Walder, they’re always naming them Walder so I’ll favor them, but his father … which one was his father now?” His face wrinkled up. “Well, whoever he was, Lord Arryn wouldn’t have him, or the other one, and I blame your lady sister for that. She frosted up as if I’d suggested selling her boy to a mummer’s show or making a eunuch out of him, and when Lord Arryn said the child was going to Dragonstone to foster with Stannis Baratheon, she stormed off without a word of regrets and all the Hand could give me was apologies. What good are apologies? I ask you.”
他的头前后摇摆。“令尊没来参加我的婚礼，在我看来，就算他快死了，这依旧是侮辱。别忘了，我上次结婚他也没来，还叫我做‘迟到的佛雷侯爵’，这你总知道吧？难道他以为我死了？我可没死，而且我跟你保证，我绝对要活得比他长，就像我活得比他老爸还久一样。你们家的人老是看我不顺眼，你别否认，也别想骗我，你很清楚我说的是实话。好些年前，我去找令尊，提议让他儿子和我女儿联姻。这有什么不好？我有个乖女儿是合适人选，只比艾德慕大几岁，就算你老弟不喜欢她，我也还有其他女儿给他挑，要年轻的有年轻的，要老的有老的，要闺女要寡妇要什么样的都成，可是呢，霍斯特大人说什么也不肯。他讲了一大堆甜言蜜语，通通都是借口，我真正想要的却是赶紧嫁掉一个女儿啊。”
Catelyn frowned, disquieted. “I had understood that Lysa’s boy was to be fostered with Lord Tywin at Casterly Rock.”
“还有你老妹，同样一副坏德行，那是一年前的事啰，当时琼恩·艾林还是御前首相，我到城里去看我儿子参加比武竞技。史提夫伦和杰瑞年纪都太大，没法下场比武，不过丹威尔和霍斯丁前去参加，派温也去了，我还有两个私生子参加团队比试。早知道他们会丢我的脸，我也不必大费周章地跑去，我倒是问你，我干嘛千里迢迢跑去看霍斯丁被提利尔家那小崽子打下马来啊？那小鬼是他一半年纪，大家都叫他什么‘小花爵士’；更可气的是丹威尔竟被一个雇佣骑士打下马来！有时候我还真怀疑他们俩到底是不是我的种？我的第三任老婆是个克雷赫家的人，克雷赫家的女人通通是些残货。唉，这些都不重要啦，你还没出生她就死了，所以干你什么事？”
“No, it was Lord Stannis,” Walder Frey said irritably. “Do you think I can’t tell Lord Stannis from Lord Tywin? They’re both bungholes who think they’re too noble to shit, but never mind about that, I know the difference. Or do you think I’m so old I can’t remember? I’m ninety and I remember very well. I remember what to do with a woman too. That wife of mine will give me a son before this time next year, I’ll wager. Or a daughter, that can’t be helped. Boy or girl, it will be red, wrinkled, and squalling, and like as not she’ll want to name it Walder or Walda.”
“我刚刚在说你妹妹。我向艾林公爵夫妇提议让我两个孙子到宫廷里做他们的养子，与之相对呢，让他们的儿子到孪河城来住一段时日。哼，莫非我的孙子就那么见不得人，没资格给朝廷里的人看？他们可都是既安静又懂礼的乖孩子，瓦德是梅里的儿子，照着我的名字取的，另外一个哩……嘿，我不记得了……好像也叫瓦德。他们都把孩子叫做瓦德·瓦妲，以为这样就会讨我喜欢，那孩子的爹……是哪一个来着？”他的脸整个皱成一团。“唉，管他是谁，总之艾林大人不要，不管哪个都不要，而我得把这事怪罪到你妹妹头上。你没看她那样子，整个人像是结了冰，好像我打算把她儿子卖给戏班，或是抓去当太监似的！艾林大人为了平息尴尬，便吐露那孩子已经决定送到龙石岛去给史坦尼斯·拜拉席恩收养，一听此言，她立刻半声不吭地冲了出去，首相大人只好不停地向我道歉。我倒是问你，道歉顶什么用哩？”
Catelyn was not concerned with what Lady Frey might choose to name her child. “Jon Arryn was going to foster his son with Lord Stannis, you are quite certain of that?”
凯特琳有些不安地皱起眉头。“我记得莱沙的孩子是要送到凯岩城去给泰温大人收养的。”
“Yes, yes, yes,” the old man said. “Only he died, so what does it matter? You say you want to cross the river?”
“不对，是史坦尼斯大人，”瓦德。佛雷很不耐烦地说，“你以为我连史坦尼斯大人和泰温大人都分不出来吗？他们两个都是自以为高贵不拉屎的粪坑，但即便这样，我还是知道谁是谁，莫非你觉得我老了，就记不清啦？我今年才九十，记得清楚得很，连怎么搞女人也没忘。我敢跟你打赌，我家那老婆不到明年这时候就会给我再添个儿子，或者女儿，那也没法子。哎呀，管他儿子女儿，还不都是红彤彤地皱成一团，哭个没完没了？我看她八成又要给孩子取名瓦德或瓦妲啦。”
“We do.”
凯特琳对佛雷夫人如何帮孩子取名毫无兴趣。“琼恩·艾林有意让史坦尼斯大人收养他的儿子，此事您可确定？”
“Well, you can’t!” Lord Walder announced crisply. “Not unless I allow it, and why should I? The Tullys and the Starks have never been friends of mine.” He pushed himself back in his chair and crossed his arms, smirking, waiting for her answer.
“对，对，对，”老人说，“只是他死啦，这有什么差别？你说你们想过河？”
The rest was only haggling.
“是的。”
A swollen red sun hung low against the western hills when the gates of the castle opened. The drawbridge creaked down, the portcullis winched up, and Lady Catelyn Stark rode forth to rejoin her son and his lords bannermen. Behind her came Ser Jared Frey, Ser Hosteen Frey, Ser Danwell Frey, and Lord Walder’s bastard son Ronel Rivers, leading a long column of pikemen, rank on rank of shuffling men in blue steel ringmail and silvery grey cloaks.
“唉，你们过不了！”瓦德侯爵干脆地宣布，“除非我答应，可我干嘛答应呢？徒利家和史塔克家对我向来不太友善。”他往后靠向椅背，双手抱胸，露出得意的笑容，等她答复。
Robb galloped out to meet her, with Grey Wind racing beside his stallion. “It’s done,” she told him. “Lord Walder will grant you your crossing. His swords are yours as well, less four hundred he means to keep back to hold the Twins. I suggest that you leave four hundred of your own, a mixed force of archers and swordsmen. He can scarcely object to an offer to augment his garrison … but make certain you give the command to a man you can trust. Lord Walder may need help keeping faith.”
剩下的就只是讨价还价。
“As you say, Mother,” Robb answered, gazing at the ranks of pikemen. “Perhaps … Ser Helman Tallhart, do you think?”
城堡大门打开时，一轮火红夕阳低垂在西方丘陵，吊桥“嘎吱嘎吱”地降下来，闸门缓缓升起，凯特琳·史塔克夫人骑马回到儿子和北境诸侯身边。跟在她身后的是杰瑞·佛雷爵士、霍斯丁·佛雷爵士、丹威尔·佛雷爵士，以及瓦德侯爵的私生子朗诺尔·河文，以及一大队长矛兵。他们身穿蓝色环甲，肩披银色披风，排成纵队，缓步走来。
“A fine choice.”
罗柏快马加鞭地迎上前，灰风飞也似地跟在他身边。“一切都办妥了，”她告诉他，“瓦德大人会让你过河，他的军队也是你的，不过他会留下四百人防守孪河城。我建议你也留下相同数目的剑士和弓箭手，他绝对无法拒绝额外的协防兵力……但千万要找你信得过的人负责指挥。瓦德大人可能会需要提醒，才能守住承诺。”
“What … what did he want of us?”
“母亲，就照您说的办。”罗柏边说边盯着那一大队长矛兵，“或许……让赫曼·陶哈爵士来负责，你意下如何？”
“If you can spare a few of your swords, I need some men to escort two of Lord Frey’s grandsons north to Winterfell,” she told him. “I have agreed to take them as wards. They are young boys, aged eight years and seven. It would seem they are both named Walder. Your brother Bran will welcome the companionship of lads near his own age, I should think.”
“很好。”
“Is that all? Two fosterlings? That’s a small enough price to—”
“他……他要我们怎么样？”
“Lord Frey’s son Olyvar will be coming with us,” she went on. “He is to serve as your personal squire. His father would like to see him knighted, in good time.”
“你要拨出几个手下，护送佛雷大人的两个孙子北上临冬城。”她告诉他，“我已经同意收他们为养子，他们年纪还小，一个七岁，一个八岁，两个都叫瓦德。我想你弟弟布兰应该会很高兴有同龄人作伴。”
“A squire.” He shrugged. “Fine, that’s fine, if he’s—”
“就这样而已？两个养子？这样的代价未免也太——”
“Also, if your sister Arya is returned to us safely, it is agreed that she will marry Lord Walder’s youngest son, Elmar, when the two of them come of age.”
“佛雷大人的儿子奥利法跟我们一起走，”她继续说，“他将担任你的私人侍从，过段时间以后，他的父亲希望能看到他被策封为骑士。”
Robb looked nonplussed. “Arya won’t like that one bit.”
“带个侍从？”他耸耸肩，“很好，没问题，如果他——”
“And you are to wed one of his daughters, once the fighting is done,” she finished. “His lordship has graciously consented to allow you to choose whichever girl you prefer. He has a number he thinks might be suitable.”
“还有，假如你妹妹艾莉亚平安归来，我们同意让她嫁给瓦德大人的幼子艾尔玛，当然，等两人成年以后。”
To his credit, Robb did not flinch. “I see.”
罗柏有些不知所措。“艾莉亚不会喜欢的。”
“Do you consent?”
“等战事结束，你也将迎娶他一个女儿，”她把话说完，“侯爵大人慷慨地同意你自行挑选，他有好些个适合的人选。”
“Can I refuse?”
这次，罗柏倒是眉头都没皱一下。“原来如此。”
“Not if you wish to cross.”
“你同意吗？”
“I consent,” Robb said solemnly. He had never seemed more manly to her than he did in that moment. Boys might play with swords, but it took a lord to make a marriage pact, knowing what it meant.
“我可以拒绝吗？”
They crossed at evenfall as a horned moon floated upon the river. The double column wound its way through the gate of the eastern twin like a great steel snake, slithering across the courtyard, into the keep and over the bridge, to issue forth once more from the second castle on the west bank.
“那你就不能渡河。”
Catelyn rode at the head of the serpent, with her son and her uncle Ser Brynden and Ser Stevron Frey. Behind followed nine tenths of their horse; knights, lancers, freeriders, and mounted bowmen. It took hours for them all to cross. Afterward, Catelyn would remember the clatter of countless hooves on the drawbridge, the sight of Lord Walder Frey in his litter watching them pass, the glitter of eyes peering down through the slats of the murder holes in the ceiling as they rode through the Water Tower.
“我同意。”罗柏郑重地说。在她眼中，他从未像此时这么有成年人的样子。小男孩或许也能舞刀弄剑，但只有真正的成年领主才能明白政治婚约的意涵，并坦然接受。
The larger part of the northern host, pikes and archers and great masses of men-at-arms on foot, remained upon the east bank under the command of Roose Bolton. Robb had commanded him to continue the march south, to confront the huge Lannister army coming north under Lord Tywin.
当晚，一弯新月漂浮水面，他们展开了渡河行动。两列纵队有如一条巨大的钢蛇，蜿蜒进入东河城，迂回绕过广场，通过内城，走上拱桥，经过又一次相同的地形后，从西岸的城堡离开。
For good or ill, her son had thrown the dice.
凯特琳骑在钢蛇前端，同行的有她儿子，叔叔布林登爵士，以及史提夫伦·佛雷爵士。身后是他们九成的骑兵，包括骑士、枪骑兵、自由骑手和弓骑兵。他们花了好几个钟头方才完成穿越。事后，凯特琳始终忘不掉无数的马蹄踏过吊桥发出的声音，以及卫河塔上瓦德·佛雷侯爵炯炯的目光。他坐在担架上，从杀人洞的细长铁条间向下俯瞰，目送他们离去。
