*DAENERYS
第四章 丹妮莉丝
H er brother held the gown up for her inspection.
哥哥举起长袍给她看。“真漂亮，你摸摸，没关系，你瞧瞧这料子。”
“This is beauty. Touch it. Go on. Caress the fabric.”
丹妮摸了摸，衣料柔软如水，流过她的手指，她从没穿过这么柔软的衣服。她突然害怕了起来，连忙抽回手。“这真是给我的么？”
Dany touched it. The cloth was so smooth that it seemed to run through her fingers like water. She could not remember ever wearing anything so soft. It frightened her. She pulled her hand away. “Is it really mine?”
“这是伊利里欧总督送的礼物，”韦赛里斯微笑道。哥哥今晚心情很好。“袍子的颜色刚好衬出你紫罗兰色的眼睛。你还要配戴金饰，以及各式各样的珠宝玉石，今晚你看起来必须有个公主的样子。”
“A gift from the Magister Illyrio,” Viserys said, smiling. Her brother was in a high mood tonight. “The color will bring out the violet in your eyes. And you shall have gold as well, and jewels of all sorts. Illyrio has promised. Tonight you must look like a princess.”
有个公主的样子，丹妮想着。她早已忘记那是什么样子了，也许她根本就不知道。“他为什么对我们这么好？”她问，“他想从我们这里得到什么好处？”过去近半年来，他们吃住都靠这位总督，在他的仆佣伺候下恃宠而骄。丹妮今年十三岁，已经懂得这种优渥的待遇不会凭空而来，尤其是在潘托斯这样的自由贸易城邦。
A princess , Dany thought. She had forgotten what that was like. Perhaps she had never really known. “Why does he give us so much?” she asked. “What does he want from us?” For nigh on half a year, they had lived in the magister’s house, eating his food, pampered by his servants. Dany was thirteen, old enough to know that such gifts seldom come without their price, here in the free city of Pentos.
“伊利里欧可不笨，”韦赛里斯回答，他是个削瘦的年轻人，双手局促不安，泛白的淡紫色眼瞳里有种狂热的神色。“他知道有朝一日当我重登王位，不会忘记曾经雪中送炭的朋友。”
“Illyrio is no fool,” Viserys said. He was a gaunt young man with nervous hands and a feverish look in his pale lilac eyes. “The magister knows that I will not forget my friends when I come into my throne.”
丹妮没有答话。伊利里欧总督是个商人，专做香料、宝石和龙骨买卖，还有其他见不得人的勾当。据说他交游广泛，不仅遍布九个自由贸易城邦，更远至东方的维斯·多斯拉克，以及玉海沿岸的传奇之地。又有人说，只要开得出价钱，任何朋友他都乐于出卖。这些话丹妮都静静地听了进去，但她知道最好不要在兄长编织迷梦时戳破。韦赛里斯一旦生气起来非常骇人，他称之为“唤醒睡龙之怒”。
Dany said nothing. Magister Illyrio was a dealer in spices, gemstones, dragonbone, and other, less savory things. He had friends in all of the Nine Free Cities, it was said, and even beyond, in Vaes Dothrak and the fabled lands beside the Jade Sea. It was also said that he’d never had a friend he wouldn’t cheerfully sell for the right price. Dany listened to the talk in the streets, and she heard these things, but she knew better than to question her brother when he wove his webs of dream. His anger was a terrible thing when roused. Viserys called it “waking the dragon.”
哥哥把袍子挂在门边。“伊利里欧会派奴隶前来伺候你沐浴，记得把身上的马臊味洗掉。卓戈卡奥①虽有千百良驹，但他今晚要骑的可是另一种马。”他仔细端详着她，“你还是弯腰驼背的老样子，要抬头挺胸。”他伸手把她的肩膀往后挺。“让他们知道你已经有女人的形态了。”他的手指微微掠扫过她正开始发育的胸部，捏住一边乳头。“今晚你不许给我出丑，若是出了差错，以后可有你受的！你不想唤醒睡龙之怒吧？”他的手指越捏越紧，隔着粗料外衣她也疼痛难忍。“想不想？”他重复。
Her brother hung the gown beside the door. “Illyrio will send the slaves to bathe you. Be sure you wash off the stink of the stables. Khal Drogo has a thousand horses, tonight he looks for a different sort of mount.” He studied her critically. “You still slouch. Straighten yourself.” He pushed back her shoulders with his hands. “Let them see that you have a woman’s shape now.” His fingers brushed lightly over her budding breasts and tightened on a nipple. “You will not fail me tonight. If you do, it will go hard for you. You don’t want to wake the dragon, do you?” His fingers twisted her, the pinch cruelly hard through the rough fabric of her tunic. “Do you?” he repeated.
“不想。”丹妮怯弱地回答。
“No,” Dany said meekly.
哥哥笑了，“很好，”他爱怜地轻抚她的秀发，“将来史家为我立传时，会说我的统治始自今夜。”
Her brother smiled. “Good.” He touched her hair, almost with affection. “When they write the history of my reign, sweet sister, they will say that it began tonight.”
他离开后，丹妮走到窗边，思慕地望着海湾。潘托斯的方砖高塔是斜阳残照里的黑色剪影，丹妮可以听见红袍僧点燃夜火时的诵唱祝祷，以及高墙外孩童玩耍的笑闹喧哗。就在那一刹那，她好希望自己能在外面和他们一起赤足嬉戏，穿着破烂衣裳喘着粗气：没有过去，没有未来，也不用参加卓戈卡奥的宅邸晚宴。
When he was gone, Dany went to her window and looked out wistfully on the waters of the bay. The square brick towers of Pentos were black silhouettes outlined against the setting sun. Dany could hear the singing of the red priests as they lit their night fires and the shouts of ragged children playing games beyond the walls of the estate. For a moment she wished she could be out there with them, barefoot and breathless and dressed in tatters, with no past and no future and no feast to attend at Khal Drogo’s manse.
在夕阳狭海的对岸，有个青陵纵横、花开平野、深河奔涌的地方，那里有高耸于壮丽灰蓝峰峦间的黑石巨塔，有高举鲜明旗帜赶赴沙场的铁甲武士。多斯拉克人称之为“雷叙·安达里”，意思是“安达尔人之地”。在自由贸易城邦里，人们呼其为“维斯特洛”和“日落国度”。而哥哥有个更简单的说法，他称之为“我们的土地”。这个名字就像句祷词，仿佛只要他挂在嘴边，就定能上达天听。“那是我们真龙血脉所继承的土地，虽然遭阴谋诡计所夺，但仍然属于我们，永远属于我们。没人能从真龙手中偷走东西，门儿都没有，因为真龙凡事都永远记得。”
Somewhere beyond the sunset, across the narrow sea, lay a land of green hills and flowered plains and great rushing rivers, where towers of dark stone rose amidst magnificent blue-grey mountains, and armored knights rode to battle beneath the banners of their lords. The Dothraki called that land Rhaesh Andahli , the land of the Andals. In the Free Cities, they talked of Westeros and the Sunset Kingdoms. Her brother had a simpler name. “Our land,” he called it. The words were like a prayer with him. If he said them enough, the gods were sure to hear. “Ours by blood right, taken from us by treachery, but ours still, ours forever. You do not steal from the dragon, oh, no. The dragon remembers.”
也许真龙记得罢，只是丹妮却记不得。那块位于狭海对岸，哥哥信誓旦旦属于他们的土地，她从来没有见过。那些他口中的名字：凯岩城、鹰巢城、高庭和艾林谷，多恩领和千面屿等，对她来说不过是文字的拼凑罢了。当年他们躲避节节进逼的“篡夺者”军队，被迫逃离君临时，韦赛里斯还是个八岁大的男孩，而丹妮只不过是母亲子宫里胎动的血肉。
And perhaps the dragon did remember, but Dany could not. She had never seen this land her brother said was theirs, this realm beyond the narrow sea. These places he talked of, Casterly Rock and the Eyrie, Highgarden and the Vale of Arryn, Dorne and the Isle of Faces, they were just words to her. Viserys had been a boy of eight when they fled King’s Landing to escape the advancing armies of the Usurper, but Daenerys had been only a quickening in their mother’s womb.
然而哥哥的故事听得多了，丹妮有时还是会在脑海里自行拼凑出过往的光景：母后他们乘着船影黑帆，在当空皓月下夜奔龙石岛；她的长兄雷加在染血的三叉戟河上与篡夺者殊死决斗，为他心爱的女人丧命；兰尼斯特和史塔克家族的部众，那些被韦赛里斯称做篡夺者走狗的队伍，洗劫君临；多恩的伊莉亚公主苦苦哀求，却眼睁睁地看着她和雷加的亲生骨肉，那个还在她胸脯上吸吮母奶的婴儿，被硬生生夺走，血淋淋地惨死；那些悬挂于王座大厅后方高墙上，末裔巨龙的亮磨头骨，用瞎盲的空洞眼窟看着“弑君者”拿起金色宝剑，切开父王的喉咙。
Yet sometimes Dany would picture the way it had been, so often had her brother told her the stories. The midnight flight to Dragonstone, moonlight shimmering on the ship’s black sails. Her brother Rhaegar battling the Usurper in the bloody waters of the Trident and dying for the woman he loved. The sack of King’s Landing by the ones Viserys called the Usurper’s dogs, the lords Lannister and Stark. Princess Elia of Dorne pleading for mercy as Rhaegar’s heir was ripped from her breast and murdered before her eyes. The polished skulls of the last dragons staring down sightlessly from the walls of the throne room while the Kingslayer opened Father’s throat with a golden sword.
逃亡之后九个月，她降生于龙石岛，时值夏季暴风来袭，仿佛要把城堡撕成碎片。据说那场暴风雨骇人无比，停泊在军港的坦格利安王家舰队被摧毁殆尽，巨石自城垛上崩落，朝海峡疯狂翻涌的潮水腾滚而去。她的母亲难产而死，为此韦赛里斯始终没有原谅她。
She had been born on Dragonstone nine moons after their flight, while a raging summer storm threatened to rip the island fastness apart. They said that storm was terrible. The Targaryen fleet was smashed while it lay at anchor, and huge stone blocks were ripped from the parapets and sent hurtling into the wild waters of the narrow sea. Her mother had died birthing her, and for that her brother Viserys had never forgiven her.
然而她也不记得龙石岛。就在“篡夺者”弟弟的舰队初成，率众来伐的前夕，他们继续亡命天涯。当时原本属于他们的七大王国②之中，只剩下他们历史悠久的家族堡垒龙石岛尚未落入敌人手中。而就连这样的情形也维持不了多久，城中守军早已暗中计划把他们出卖给“篡夺者”。但某天夜里，威廉·戴瑞爵士带着四位死士杀进育婴房，把他们连同奶妈一起带走，在夜幕掩护下纵帆驶往布拉佛斯的海岸。
She did not remember Dragonstone either. They had run again, just before the Usurper’s brother set sail with his new-built fleet. By then only Dragonstone itself, the ancient seat of their House, had remained of the Seven Kingdoms that had once been theirs. It would not remain for long. The garrison had been prepared to sell them to the Usurper, but one night Ser Willem Darry and four loyal men had broken into the nursery and stolen them both, along with her wet nurse, and set sail under cover of darkness for the safety of the Braavosian coast.
她只依稀记得威廉·戴瑞爵士，他是个魁梧的灰胡壮汉，纵使后来眼睛半盲，还能从病榻上高声怒吼、发号施令。仆人们很怕他，但他待丹妮始终亲切慈蔼，唤她作“小公主”，有时则是“我的小姐”；他的双手犹如皮革般柔软。然而他始终没有离开病床，日夜被疾病的气息所缠绕，那是种湿热而恶心的甜味。当时他们住在布拉佛斯一栋有着红漆大门的房子里，丹妮有自己的房间，寝室窗外还有棵柠檬树。威廉爵士死后，仆人们把仅剩的一点钱全给偷走，没过多久他们便被逐出那栋宽敞红屋。当红漆大门为他们永远关闭时，丹妮再也止不住眼泪。
She remembered Ser Willem dimly, a great grey bear of a man, half-blind, roaring and bellowing orders from his sickbed. The servants had lived in terror of him, but he had always been kind to Dany. He called her “Little Princess” and sometimes “My Lady,” and his hands were soft as old leather. He never left his bed, though, and the smell of sickness clung to him day and night, a hot, moist, sickly sweet odor. That was when they lived in Braavos, in the big house with the red door. Dany had her own room there, with a lemon tree outside her window. After Ser Willem had died, the servants had stolen what little money they had left, and soon after they had been put out of the big house. Dany had cried when the red door closed behind them forever.
从那之后，他们开始了流浪的岁月，从布拉佛斯到密尔，从密尔到泰洛西，后来又到过科霍尔、瓦兰提斯和里斯，漂泊无依，未曾在一处落脚扎根。哥哥不肯定居下来，他总说“篡夺者”派来的杀手紧追在后，然而丹妮却连半个刺客也没见着。
They had wandered since then, from Braavos to Myr, from Myr to Tyrosh, and on to Qohor and Volantis and Lys, never staying long in any one place. Her brother would not allow it. The Usurper’s hired knives were close behind them, he insisted, though Dany had never seen one.
起初统治各自由贸易城邦的总督、大君和商界巨贾很乐于接待坦格利安后裔，但随着日子渐渐过去，“篡夺者”在铁王座上越坐越稳，原本为他们敞开的门便一扇扇关了起来，他们的日子也日益艰苦。几年来，他们当掉了所有的珠宝。到如今，连贩卖母亲的王冠所得的钱币也全部花光。在潘托斯的酒馆和巷弄里，人们给哥哥取了个外号叫“乞丐王”，丹妮不敢想像他们怎么称呼她。
At first the magisters and archons and merchant princes were pleased to welcome the last Targaryens to their homes and tables, but as the years passed and the Usurper continued to sit upon the Iron Throne, doors closed and their lives grew meaner. Years past they had been forced to sell their last few treasures, and now even the coin they had gotten from Mother’s crown had gone. In the alleys and wine sinks of Pentos, they called her brother “the beggar king.” Dany did not want to know what they called her.
“我的好妹妹，有朝一日我们定会收复故土。”韦赛里斯经常这么对她承诺，有时他边说手还会无法克制地颤抖。“想想那些珠宝丝绸，龙石岛和君临，铁王座和七大王国，全都从我们手中抢了过去，而我们通通会要回来的。”韦赛里斯之所以活着就是为了那一天的到来，丹妮却只想重回那栋有红漆大门的宅院，想要她窗外的那株柠檬树，还有她失去的童年。
“We will have it all back someday, sweet sister,” he would promise her. Sometimes his hands shook when he talked about it. “The jewels and the silks, Dragonstone and King’s Landing, the Iron Throne and the Seven Kingdoms, all they have taken from us, we will have it back.” Viserys lived for that day. All that Daenerys wanted back was the big house with the red door, the lemon tree outside her window, the childhood she had never known.
门上响起一阵轻敲。“进来。”窗边的丹妮回过神，伊利里欧的仆婢们走进屋内，鞠躬行礼，然后动手准备沐浴。他们皆为奴隶，是总督熟识的多斯拉克人酋长中某一位赠送的礼物。自由城邦潘托斯名义上没有奴隶制度，即便如此，握有实权的人们却能够逾越体例。那名瘦小而灰白如鼠的老妪总是不发一语，但另外那位年轻女孩正好弥补这个空缺。她是个金发碧眼的十六岁少女，也是伊利里欧最宠爱的奴婢，工作时总是喋喋不休。
There came a soft knock on her door. “Come,” Dany said, turning away from the window. Illyrio’s servants entered, bowed, and set about their business. They were slaves, a gift from one of the magister’s many Dothraki friends. There was no slavery in the free city of Pentos. Nonetheless, they were slaves. The old woman, small and grey as a mouse, never said a word, but the girl made up for it. She was Illyrio’s favorite, a fair-haired, blue-eyed wench of sixteen who chattered constantly as she worked.
她们在澡盆里放满从厨房提来的热水，洒进香油。女孩用条粗布巾裹住丹妮头发，搀扶她入浴。洗浴水滚烫无比，但丹妮莉丝没有吭声。她喜欢这种热，让她有干净的感觉。更何况哥哥常对她说，坦格利安家族的人是不怕烫的。“我们是真龙传人，”他常说：“血液里燃烧着熊熊烈焰。”
They filled her bath with hot water brought up from the kitchen and scented it with fragrant oils. The girl pulled the rough cotton tunic over Dany’s head and helped her into the tub. The water was scalding hot, but Daenerys did not flinch or cry out. She liked the heat. It made her feel clean. Besides, her brother had often told her that it was never too hot for a Targaryen. “Ours is the house of the dragon,” he would say. “The fire is in our blood.”
老妇人仔细地为她梳洗，把她银白色的秀发扎成辫子，默默理清纠结起来的发束。女孩则一边为她刷背洗脚，一边告诉她她有多么幸运。“听说卓戈家财万贯，连他奴隶的项圈都是金子做的。他的‘卡拉萨’③有十万名战士，他在维斯·多斯拉克城里的宫殿有两百个房间，还有用银子打造的门扉。”她说个不停，没完没了。她告诉丹妮，卡奥是多么英俊，多么高大凶猛，在战场上又是如何从不畏惧，说他不仅是有史以来最优秀的骑手，更是如恶魔般的神射手。丹妮莉丝从头到尾不发一语，她一直以为自己成年后嫁的人是韦赛里斯。自“征服者”伊耿娶两位妹妹为妻伊始，数百年来坦格利安王族成员向来是兄妹通婚。惟有如此，才能确保血脉纯正，这话韦赛里斯不知已经告诉过她多少遍了。他们体内流淌的是王者的血液，古老瓦雷利亚民族的金色血液，骄傲真龙的血液。真龙绝不和寻常野兽媾合，坦格利安族人自然更不会将他们的血液和下等人种混杂一起。然而现在韦赛里斯却打算把她卖给这个异乡的野蛮人。
The old woman washed her long, silver-pale hair and gently combed out the snags, all in silence. The girl scrubbed her back and her feet and told her how lucky she was. “Drogo is so rich that even his slaves wear golden collars. A hundred thousand men ride in his khalasar , and his palace in Vaes Dothrak has two hundred rooms and doors of solid silver.” There was more like that, so much more, what a handsome man the khal was, so tall and fierce, fearless in battle, the best rider ever to mount a horse, a demon archer. Daenerys said nothing. She had always assumed that she would wed Viserys when she came of age. For centuries the Targaryens had married brother to sister, since Aegon the Conqueror had taken his sisters to bride. The line must be kept pure, Viserys had told her a thousand times; theirs was the kingsblood, the golden blood of old Valyria, the blood of the dragon. Dragons did not mate with the beasts of the field, and Targaryens did not mingle their blood with that of lesser men. Yet now Viserys schemed to sell her to a stranger, a barbarian.
沐浴清净之后，女奴扶她起身，拿毛巾擦干她的躯体。女孩把她的头发梳理得亮如熔银，老妇则为她搽上原产多斯拉克草原的花草香精，两腕、耳后、乳尖、双唇和下体各轻触一抹；接着为她穿上伊利里欧总督送来的内衣，再罩上深紫丝袍，衬出她的紫罗兰色眼瞳。女孩为她套上金边凉鞋，老妪又为她戴上宝冠和镶着紫水晶的金手镯。最后才是黄金打造的厚重项圈，上面刻满古瓦雷利亚的符文。
When she was clean, the slaves helped her from the water and toweled her dry. The girl brushed her hair until it shone like molten silver, while the old woman anointed her with the spiceflower perfume of the Dothraki plains, a dab on each wrist, behind her ears, on the tips of her breasts, and one last one, cool on her lips, down there between her legs. They dressed her in the wisps that Magister Illyrio had sent up, and then the gown, a deep plum silk to bring out the violet in her eyes. The girl slid the gilded sandals onto her feet, while the old woman fixed the tiara in her hair, and slid golden bracelets crusted with amethysts around her wrists. Last of all came the collar, a heavy golden torc emblazoned with ancient Valyrian glyphs.
“这下你看起来总算有几分公主的模样了。”装扮完毕之后，女孩惊叹道。丹妮转身看看自己在镶银穿衣镜里的模样，镜子是伊利里欧殷勤提供的。有个公主的样子，她暗忖，忽然又想起女孩刚才说过的话，卓戈卡奥富可敌国，连他奴隶的项圈都是金子打造，不禁浑身发冷，鸡皮疙瘩冒了出来。
“Now you look all a princess,” the girl said breathlessly when they were done. Dany glanced at her image in the silvered looking glass that Illyrio had so thoughtfully provided. A princess , she thought, but she remembered what the girl had said, how Khal Drogo was so rich even his slaves wore golden collars. She felt a sudden chill, and gooseflesh pimpled her bare arms.
哥哥在阴凉的门厅里等她，他坐在池塘边，探手在水里晃悠。看到她来了他便站起身，带着评审意味地上下打量。“站过来，”他告诉她，“转过去，对，很好，你看起来……”
Her brother was waiting in the cool of the entry hall, seated on the edge of the pool, his hand trailing in the water. He rose when she appeared and looked her over critically. “Stand there,” he told her. “Turn around. Yes. Good. You look …”
“颇有王家风范。”伊利里欧总督从过道里走出，他虽臃肿肥胖，踏起步来却意外地轻盈优雅。随着脚步，他那一身肥肉在宽松的火红丝衣下不住晃动。他的每根指头都有宝石闪烁，仆人更为他的黄色八字胡擦了油，亮得仿若真金。“丹妮莉丝公主，愿您在这个黄道吉日里，得到光之王的所有祝福。”总督说罢牵起她的手，低头行礼，透过金色胡须，他露出满嘴黄牙。“王子殿下，就算是梦中佳人也不过如此啊。”他告诉哥哥，“卓戈一定会满意的。”
“Regal,” Magister Illyrio said, stepping through an archway. He moved with surprising delicacy for such a massive man. Beneath loose garments of flame-colored silk, rolls of fat jiggled as he walked. Gemstones glittered on every finger, and his man had oiled his forked yellow beard until it shone like real gold. “May the Lord of Light shower you with blessings on this most fortunate day, Princess Daenerys,” the magister said as he took her hand. He bowed his head, showing a thin glimpse of crooked yellow teeth through the gold of his beard. “She is a vision, Your Grace, a vision,” he told her brother. “Drogo will be enraptured.”
“她实在是太瘦了，”韦赛里斯说。他的头发和丹妮一样是淡银色，梳理到脑后，用一根龙骨发夹固定。他过分凝重的神色凸显出他僵硬枯槁的面容，他把手放在伊利里欧借给他的佩剑柄上。“你确定卓戈卡奥喜欢这么年轻的女人吗？”
“She’s too skinny,” Viserys said. His hair, the same silver-blond as hers, had been pulled back tightly behind his head and fastened with a dragonbone brooch. It was a severe look that emphasized the hard, gaunt lines of his face. He rested his hand on the hilt of the sword that Illyrio had lent him, and said, “Are you sure that Khal Drogo likes his women this young?”
“她既有过月事，对马王来说便已足龄。”这不是伊利里欧第一次重复了。“你瞧瞧她那头银金色的秀发，那双紫薇般的眼睛……她拥有古老瓦雷利亚的血统，毫无疑问，毫无疑问……况且她出身显赫，既是老王的女儿，又是新王的妹妹，说什么也不会吸引不了卓戈的。”当他放开她的手时，丹妮发现自己竟浑身颤抖。
“She has had her blood. She is old enough for the khal,” Illyrio told him, not for the first time. “Look at her. That silver-gold hair, those purple eyes … she is the blood of old Valyria, no doubt, no doubt … and highborn, daughter of the old king, sister to the new, she cannot fail to entrance our Drogo.” When he released her hand, Daenerys found herself trembling.
“是这样吗？”哥哥满腹狐疑地说，“这些野蛮人口味特别怪，连小男孩、马和羊都能搞……”
“I suppose,” her brother said doubtfully. “The savages have queer tastes. Boys, horses, sheep …”
“最好别在卓戈卡奥面前提起这些。”
“Best not suggest this to Khal Drogo,” Illyrio said.
哥哥淡紫色的眼瞳里闪现怒火。“你当我是笨蛋？”
Anger flashed in her brother’s lilac eyes. “Do you take me for a fool?”
总督微微低头。“我当您是个王者。所谓王者无凡虑，倘若我冒犯了您，那么我向您道歉。”语毕他转身击掌，示意轿夫动身。
The magister bowed slightly. “I take you for a king. Kings lack the caution of common men. My apologies if I have given offense.” He turned away and clapped his hands for his bearers.
待他们坐上伊利里欧雕琢华丽的轿子，潘托斯的街市已经漆黑一片。两名仆人走在前方照明，手里提着装饰精美，有着淡蓝玻璃罩子的油灯；另外十来个壮丁则协力扛着轿子。轿子帘幕之内封闭而温暖，透过伊利里欧身上那层厚重的香水，丹妮闻得到他苍白皮肤的臭味。
The streets of Pentos were pitch-dark when they set out in Illyrio’s elaborately carved palanquin. Two servants went ahead to light their way, carrying ornate oil lanterns with panes of pale blue glass, while a dozen strong men hoisted the poles to their shoulders. It was warm and close inside behind the curtains. Dany could smell the stench of Illyrio’s pallid flesh through his heavy perfumes.
那斜卧在她身旁枕边的哥哥对此倒是浑然不觉，他的心思早飞到狭海对岸去了。“我们用不着他整个卡拉萨，”韦赛里斯说，手指头把弄着那把借来的宝剑剑柄。其实丹妮知道哥哥从未认真学过剑术。“只要一万人，我想就够了。有这一万名多斯拉克哮吼武士，我便可以横扫七国全境。届时诸侯望族必会纷纷起而效力，追随他们真正的国王。提利尔、雷德温、戴瑞、葛雷乔伊等家族和我一样痛恨‘篡夺者’，南境多恩领的人早就满腔怒火，要为伊莉亚公主和她的孩子们复仇。更别提平民百姓了，他们会发出正义的怒吼，为国王而奋战。”他有点紧张地看看伊利里欧，“他们一直都这么想，对吧？”
Her brother, sprawled out on his pillows beside her, never noticed. His mind was away across the narrow sea. “We won’t need his whole khalasar,” Viserys said. His fingers toyed with the hilt of his borrowed blade, though Dany knew he had never used a sword in earnest. “Ten thousand, that would be enough, I could sweep the Seven Kingdoms with ten thousand Dothraki screamers. The realm will rise for its rightful king. Tyrell, Redwyne, Darry, Greyjoy, they have no more love for the Usurper than I do. The Dornishmen burn to avenge Elia and her children. And the smallfolk will be with us. They cry out for their king.” He looked at Illyrio anxiously. “They do, don’t they?”
“他们是您的子民，对您爱戴有加，”伊利里欧总督和颜悦色地回答，“全国上下的农庄村舍里，男人偷偷举杯向你致敬，女人则暗中缝制真龙旗帜，等待你率军渡海之日。”他耸耸宽阔的肩膀，“我的手下都这么说。”
“They are your people, and they love you well,” Magister Illyrio said amiably. “In holdfasts all across the realm, men lift secret toasts to your health while women sew dragon banners and hide them against the day of your return from across the water.” He gave a massive shrug. “Or so my agents tell me.”
丹妮没有手下，也无从得知狭海对岸的人们究竟在想些什么，做些什么，但她不相信伊利里欧这个人，也不相信他的甜言蜜语。然而哥哥却很热切地颔首同意。“我要亲自手刃篡夺者，”他立下宏愿，也没想想自己从没杀过人。“像他当年杀我哥哥一样。我也饶不了那个兰尼斯特家的‘弑君者’，我要为父王报仇。”
Dany had no agents, no way of knowing what anyone was doing or thinking across the narrow sea, but she mistrusted Illyrio’s sweet words as she mistrusted everything about Illyrio. Her brother was nodding eagerly, however. “I shall kill the Usurper myself,” he promised, who had never killed anyone, “as he killed my brother Rhaegar. And Lannister too, the Kingslayer, for what he did to my father.”
“这是再恰当不过的了。”伊利里欧总督道。丹妮瞥见他嘴际扬起细微的笑意，但哥哥却没注意，只是满意地点点头，然后掀开帘幕，望向无边黑夜。丹妮知道他脑海里又在演练当年三河血战的场景了。
“That would be most fitting,” Magister Illyrio said. Dany saw the smallest hint of a smile playing around his full lips, but her brother did not notice. Nodding, he pushed back a curtain and stared off into the night, and Dany knew he was fighting the Battle of the Trident once again.
卓戈卡奥的寝宫坐落在海湾边，拔起九座高塔，高耸砖墙上爬满苍白的长春藤。伊利里欧告诉他们，这座宫殿是潘托斯的总督们联合致赠卡奥的礼物，自由贸易城邦向来对这些游牧族长礼敬有加。“其实我们也不是真怕这些野蛮人，”他笑吟吟地给他们解释，“红袍僧们保证，有光之王庇佑，纵使百万多斯拉克人来袭，我们也无须惧怕……但他们的友谊既然如此廉价，咱们何乐而不为呢？”
The nine-towered manse of Khal Drogo sat beside the waters of the bay, its high brick walls overgrown with pale ivy. It had been given to the khal by the magisters of Pentos, Illyrio told them. The Free Cities were always generous with the horselords. “It is not that we fear these barbarians,” Illyrio would explain with a smile. “The Lord of Light would hold our city walls against a million Dothraki, or so the red priests promise … yet why take chances, when their friendship comes so cheap?”
轿子在门口停下来，一名守卫粗鲁地掀开帘幕。他有多斯拉克人典型的古铜色皮肤和黑色杏眼，但脸上却没有胡须，戴着“无垢者”④的青铜盔，上面有根刺。他冷冷扫视轿内乘客，伊利里欧总督用刺耳的多斯拉克语朝他吼了几句，对方也用相同的声调回应，然后便挥挥手示意他们进去。
Their palanquin was stopped at the gate, the curtains pulled roughly back by one of the house guards. He had the copper skin and dark almond eyes of a Dothraki, but his face was hairless and he wore the spiked bronze cap of the Unsullied. He looked them over coldly. Magister Illyrio growled something to him in the rough Dothraki tongue; the guardsman replied in the same voice and waved them through the gates.
丹妮注意到她哥哥的手紧紧握住那把借来的佩剑剑柄，看起来仿佛和她一样害怕。“不知好歹的臭太监。”韦赛里斯喃喃道，轿子颠簸着抬进宅院。
Dany noticed that her brother’s hand was clenched tightly around the hilt of his borrowed sword. He looked almost as frightened as she felt. “Insolent eunuch,” Viserys muttered as the palanquin lurched up toward the manse.
伊利里欧总督的话语甜如蜜糖：“许多达官显赫都会出席今晚盛宴，这些人平日里树敌甚多，作东的卡奥自然要保护客人，尤其是陛下您。不难想见，‘篡夺者’可是会出高价悬赏您的项上人头啊。”
Magister Illyrio’s words were honey. “Many important men will be at the feast tonight. Such men have enemies. The khal must protect his guests, yourself chief among them, Your Grace. No doubt the Usurper would pay well for your head.”
“可不是么？”韦赛里斯阴沉地说，“伊利里欧，他可是试了又试，这点我可以向你保证。他雇来的刺客紧盯我们不放，我是最后的真龙传人，只要我活着，他自然寝食难安。”
“Oh, yes,” Viserys said darkly. “He has tried, Illyrio, I promise you that. His hired knives follow us everywhere. I am the last dragon, and he will not sleep easy while I live.”
轿子速度渐缓，终于停了下来。帘幕再度掀开，一名奴隶伸手搀扶丹妮莉丝出轿。此时她注意到他的项圈不过是青铜打造罢了。她的兄长亦步亦趋地跟上，一只手仍旧紧握着剑柄不放。伊利里欧则靠着两名壮丁的帮忙好不容易才下了轿子。
The palanquin slowed and stopped. The curtains were thrown back, and a slave offered a hand to help Daenerys out. His collar, she noted, was ordinary bronze. Her brother followed, one hand still clenched hard around his sword hilt. It took two strong men to get Magister Illyrio back on his feet.
厅院之内，空气中弥漫着火椒、肉桂和甜檬等香料的馨香气息。他们被护送进会客厅，彩色镶嵌玻璃描绘出瓦雷利亚的殒落场景。四面墙壁上黑色灯笼里的灯油燃烧不绝，刻绘着两片石叶的拱廊下，一名太监正高声宣告他们的到访：“坦格利安家族的韦赛里斯三世，”他用高亢甜腻的声音喊，“安达尔人、洛伊拿人及‘先民’的国王，七国统治者暨全境守护者。他的妹妹，龙石岛公主‘风暴降生’丹妮莉丝。他的赞助人，潘托斯自由贸易城邦总督，伊利里欧·摩帕提斯。”
Inside the manse, the air was heavy with the scent of spices, pinchfire and sweet lemon and cinnamon. They were escorted across the entry hall, where a mosaic of colored glass depicted the Doom of Valyria. Oil burned in black iron lanterns all along the walls. Beneath an arch of twining stone leaves, a eunuch sang their coming. “Viserys of the House Targaryen, the Third of his Name,” he called in a high, sweet voice, “King of the Andals and the Rhoynar and the First Men, Lord of the Seven Kingdoms and Protector of the Realm. His sister, Daenerys Stormborn, Princess of Dragonstone. His honorable host, Illyrio Mopatis, Magister of the Free City of Pentos.”
他们越过太监，走进石柱林立，苍白长春藤四处攀蔓的庭院，叶影被月光染成白骨般的银色。院落里宾客往来穿梭，其中不少是多斯拉克卡奥，个个身躯高大，皮肤红褐，低垂长髯用金属银圈环环相扣，黑色长发乌黑油亮，绑成无数发辫，银铃悬系其间。然而人群中同样也有来自潘托斯、密尔和泰洛西的杀手和佣兵，有个比伊利里欧更胖的红袍僧，还有来自伊班港，浑身是毛的怪人，以及几位皮肤黑如暗檀的盛夏群岛领主。丹妮莉丝满怀惊奇地看着这些人……突然惊觉自己是在场惟一女性。
They stepped past the eunuch into a pillared courtyard overgrown in pale ivy. Moonlight painted the leaves in shades of bone and silver as the guests drifted among them. Many were Dothraki horselords, big men with red-brown skin, their drooping mustachios bound in metal rings, their black hair oiled and braided and hung with bells. Yet among them moved bravos and sellswords from Pentos and Myr and Tyrosh, a red priest even fatter than Illyrio, hairy men from the Port of Ibben, and lords from the Summer Isles with skin as black as ebony. Daenerys looked at them all in wonder … and realized, with a sudden start of fear, that she was the only woman there.
伊利里欧向他们耳语道：“站在那边的三位是卓戈的血盟卫，柱子边的是摩洛卡奥和他儿子罗戈洛。那个绿胡子的人是泰洛西大君的哥哥，他后面的则是乔拉·莫尔蒙爵士。”
Illyrio whispered to them. “Those three are Drogo’s bloodriders, there,” he said. “By the pillar is Khal Moro, with his son Rhogoro. The man with the green beard is brother to the Archon of Tyrosh, and the man behind him is Ser Jorah Mormont.”
最后一个名字引起了丹妮莉丝的注意，“他是个骑士？”
The last name caught Daenerys. “A knight?”
“如假包换，”伊利里欧透过胡子咯咯笑道，“被总主教大人亲手涂抹七圣油的骑士。”
“No less.” Illyrio smiled through his beard. “Anointed with the seven oils by the High Septon himself.”
“他在这里做什么？”她脱口而出。
“What is he doing here?” she blurted.
“就为了点芝麻绿豆小事，”伊利里欧告诉他们，“‘篡夺者’下令要他项上人头。他把几个逮着的盗猎者私自卖给泰洛西的奴隶贩子，而没有把他们交给守夜人。真是荒谬的法律，人人都应当有权处置自己的财产才对。”
“The Usurper wanted his head,” Illyrio told them. “Some trifling affront. He sold some poachers to a Tyroshi slaver instead of giving them to the Night’s Watch. Absurd law. A man should be able to do as he likes with his own chattel.”
“晚宴结束前，我要和乔拉爵士谈谈。”哥哥说。丹妮发现自己也好奇地端详着这位骑士，他年纪颇大，约莫四十来岁，头发虽已逐渐稀少，但身体仍旧健壮。他不穿丝棉质的衣服，改穿羊毛和皮革，一件暗绿色的外衣上绣着双脚人立的黑熊。
“I shall wish to speak with Ser Jorah before the night is done,” her brother said. Dany found herself looking at the knight curiously. He was an older man, past forty and balding, but still strong and fit. Instead of silks and cottons, he wore wool and leather. His tunic was a dark green, embroidered with the likeness of a black bear standing on two legs.
伊利里欧总督用他潮湿的手拍了拍丹妮裸露的肩膀，此刻她正目不转睛地看着那名来自她一无所知的草原的怪异男子。“好公主，您瞧好了，”他悄声道，“这就是卡奥他本人啦。”
She was still looking at this strange man from the homeland she had never known when Magister Illyrio placed a moist hand on her bare shoulder. “Over there, sweet princess,” he whispered, “there is the khal himself.”
丹妮心中只想赶紧逃避躲藏，但哥哥正盯着她呢，假如惹火了他，又得唤醒睡龙之怒。于是她紧张地转过头去，怯生生地打量起那个韦赛里斯希望在今晚宴会结束前开口要求娶她为妻的人。
Dany wanted to run and hide, but her brother was looking at her, and if she displeased him she knew she would wake the dragon. Anxiously, she turned and looked at the man Viserys hoped would ask to wed her before the night was done.
先前帮她沐浴的那名女孩所说的和事实倒也差距不大：卓戈卡奥比在场最高的人都还要高出一头，然而动作却极为敏捷轻灵，矫健的身形一如伊利里欧百兽园里的猎豹。他远比她想像中来得年轻，应该不超过三十岁。他的皮肤乃是亮铜色，厚重的胡须上系着黄金和青铜的铃铛。
The slave girl had not been far wrong, she thought. Khal Drogo was a head taller than the tallest man in the room, yet somehow light on his feet, as graceful as the panther in Illyrio’s menagerie. He was younger than she’d thought, no more than thirty. His skin was the color of polished copper, his thick mustachios bound with gold and bronze rings.
“我得过去表明来意。”伊利里欧总督说，“在这儿等着，我会带他过来。”
“I must go and make my submissions,” Magister Illyrio said. “Wait here. I shall bring him to you.”
当伊利里欧摇摇摆摆地走向卡奥时，哥哥紧紧抓住她的手，箍得她直想喊痛。“好妹妹，你看到他的辫子了没？”
Her brother took her by the arm as Illyrio waddled over to the khal , his fingers squeezing so hard that they hurt. “Do you see his braid, sweet sister?”
卓戈的发辫黑亮宛如午夜长空，涂抹了香油，看起来沉甸甸的，上面系有许多金属小铃，随他行动而当啷作响。他的长发过腰，超过臀部，尾端轻拂着大腿。
Drogo’s braid was black as midnight and heavy with scented oil, hung with tiny bells that rang softly as he moved. It swung well past his belt, below even his buttocks, the end of it brushing against the back of his thighs.
“你看到他的头发有多长了没？”韦赛里斯问，“每当多斯拉克人在战斗中落败，他们便割去辫子以示不誉，如此全世界都会知道他们的耻辱。卓戈卡奥一辈子都没有吃过败仗，他称得上是龙王伊耿再世，而你将会是他的王后。”
“You see how long it is?” Viserys said. “When Dothraki are defeated in combat, they cut off their braids in disgrace, so the world will know their shame. Khal Drogo has never lost a fight. He is Aegon the Dragonlord come again, and you will be his queen.”
丹妮看着卓戈卡奥，他的容貌刚毅冷峻，眼瞳黑亮冰如玛瑙。当她不小心唤醒睡龙之怒的时候，哥哥会欺负她，但他不像眼前这个男人这样能把她吓得六神无主。“我不想当他的王后，”她听见自己用细小的声音说，“韦赛里斯，求求你，求求你，我不要，我真的好想回家。”
Dany looked at Khal Drogo. His face was hard and cruel, his eyes as cold and dark as onyx. Her brother hurt her sometimes, when she woke the dragon, but he did not frighten her the way this man frightened her. “I don’t want to be his queen,” she heard herself say in a small, thin voice. “Please, please , Viserys, I don’t want to, I want to go home.”
“回家？”虽然他刻意把声音压低，但丹妮还是听得出话音里的愤怒。“好妹妹，你倒是说说看，我们回哪个家啊？我们的家早给人夺走了！”他把她拉进一旁的阴影里，避开众人的视线，指甲用力抠进她的肌肤。“我们回哪个家啊？”他重复着问，言下之意，家即是指君临、龙石岛和那整个失去的国度。
“Home!” He kept his voice low, but she could hear the fury in his tone. “How are we to go home, sweet sister? They took our home from us!” He drew her into the shadows, out of sight, his fingers digging into her skin. “How are we to go home?” he repeated, meaning King’s Landing, and Dragonstone, and all the realm they had lost.
可丹妮所指的根本就不是这些，她要的只是他们在伊利里欧宅邸里的居所，那儿虽然算不上真正的归宿，但毕竟是眼下他们所拥有的一切。可哥哥不愿听这些话，那里不是他的家，就连红漆门院也不是。他的指甲越掐越紧，似乎在逼问答案。最后她终于哑着嗓子，噙着泪水低语道：“我不知道……”
Dany had only meant their rooms in Illyrio’s estate, no true home surely, though all they had, but her brother did not want to hear that. There was no home there for him. Even the big house with the red door had not been home for him. His fingers dug hard into her arm, demanding an answer. “I don’t know …” she said at last, her voice breaking. Tears welled in her eyes.
“我却是知道的。”哥哥尖刻地说，“我们会带着一支军队回家，好妹妹，我们会带着卓戈的千军万马回家。假如你必须嫁给他，跟他上床才能换来这些，你就给我乖乖去做。”他朝她浅笑，“只要我能得到那支军队，就算得让他卡拉萨里的四万人通通把你操上一遍，我也会同意，必要的话，连他们的马一起上也行。现在你只给卓戈一个人干，已经该偷笑了。还不快把眼泪擦干，伊利里欧就要带他过来，我可不想让他看见你哭哭啼啼的样子。”
“I do,” he said sharply. “We go home with an army, sweet sister. With Khal Drogo’s army, that is how we go home. And if you must wed him and bed him for that, you will.” He smiled at her. “I’d let his whole khalasar fuck you if need be, sweet sister, all forty thousand men, and their horses too if that was what it took to get my army. Be grateful it is only Drogo. In time you may even learn to like him. Now dry your eyes. Illyrio is bringing him over, and he will not see you crying.”
丹妮转过头去，果然总督脸上堆满笑容，正一边打躬作揖一边陪送卓戈卡奥朝他们这边走来，她赶紧用手背抹去还未掉下的泪滴。
Dany turned and saw that it was true. Magister Illyrio, all smiles and bows, was escorting Khal Drogo over to where they stood. She brushed away unfallen tears with the back of her hand.
“快对他笑，”韦赛里斯的手又落到佩剑的剑柄上，紧张地说，“抬头挺胸，让他看看你那点胸部。诸神在上，你已经够平了。”
“Smile,” Viserys whispered nervously, his hand falling to the hilt of his sword. “And stand up straight. Let him see that you have breasts. Gods know, you have little enough as is.”
于是丹妮莉丝露出微笑，挺起胸膛。
Daenerys smiled, and stood up straight.
