*ARYA
第八章 艾莉亚
A rya’s stitches were crooked again.
艾莉亚的缝衣针又歪了。
She frowned down at them with dismay and glanced over to where her sister Sansa sat among the other girls. Sansa’s needlework was exquisite. Everyone said so. “Sansa’s work is as pretty as she is,” Septa Mordane told their lady mother once. “She has such fine, delicate hands.” When Lady Catelyn had asked about Arya, the septa had sniffed. “Arya has the hands of a blacksmith.”
她懊恼地皱起眉头，看着手里那团乱七八糟的东西，然后又偷偷瞄了瞄和其他女孩坐在一起的姐姐珊莎。每个人都说珊莎的针线功夫完美无瑕。“珊莎织出来的东西就跟她人一样漂亮。”有次茉丹修女对她们的母亲大人这么说，“她那双手既纤细又灵巧。”当凯特琳夫人问起艾莉亚的表现时，修女哼了一声答道：“艾莉亚的手跟铁匠的手没两样。”
Arya glanced furtively across the room, worried that Septa Mordane might have read her thoughts, but the septa was paying her no attention today. She was sitting with the Princess Myrcella, all smiles and admiration. It was not often that the septa was privileged to instruct a royal princess in the womanly arts, as she had said when the queen brought Myrcella to join them. Arya thought that Myrcella’s stitches looked a little crooked too, but you would never know it from the way Septa Mordane was cooing.
艾莉亚偷偷环视房间四周，担心茉丹修女会读出她的思想。但是修女今天可没把心思放在她身上，她正坐在弥赛菈公主身旁，脸上堆满笑容，口中连声赞美。先前当王后把弥赛菈带来加入她们时，修女就说她平生可没这种福气，可以指导公主针线女红。艾莉亚觉得弥赛菈的针线也有点歪七扭八，但是从茉丹修女的甜言蜜语听起来，旁人绝对想不到。
She studied her own work again, looking for some way to salvage it, then sighed and put down the needle. She looked glumly at her sister. Sansa was chatting away happily as she worked. Beth Cassel, Ser Rodrik’s little girl, was sitting by her feet, listening to every word she said, and Jeyne Poole was leaning over to whisper something in her ear.
她又瞧了瞧自己的活儿，想找出个补救的法子，最后还是叹了口气，把针线搁到一边去了。她沮丧地看看自己的姐姐，珊莎正一边巧手缝纫，一边开心地说闲话。罗德利克爵士的女儿小贝丝·凯索坐在她脚边，认真地聆听她所说的一字一句。这时候，珍妮·普尔刚巧凑在她耳旁不知说了些什么悄悄话。
“What are you talking about?” Arya asked suddenly.
“你们在说什么呀？”艾莉亚突然问。
Jeyne gave her a startled look, then giggled. Sansa looked abashed. Beth blushed. No one answered.
珍妮露出吃惊的表情，随即咯咯笑了起来。珊莎一脸羞赧，贝丝也面红耳赤。没有人答话。
“Tell me,” Arya said.
“跟我说嘛。”艾莉亚说。
Jeyne glanced over to make certain that Septa Mordane was not listening. Myrcella said something then, and the septa laughed along with the rest of the ladies.
珍妮偷瞟了那边一眼，确定茉丹修女没有注意听。恰好弥赛菈说了点话，修女随即和其他仕女一同放声大笑。
“We were talking about the prince,” Sansa said, her voice soft as a kiss.
“我们刚刚在说王子的事。”珊莎说，声音轻得像一个吻。
Arya knew which prince she meant: Joffrey, of course. The tall, handsome one. Sansa got to sit with him at the feast. Arya had to sit with the little fat one. Naturally.
艾莉亚当然知道姐姐指的哪一个王子，除了那个高大英俊的乔佛里还会是谁？先前晚宴的时候珊莎和他坐在一起，艾莉亚则自然而然地得坐在另外那个小胖子旁边了。
“Joffrey likes your sister,” Jeyne whispered, proud as if she had something to do with it. She was the daughter of Winterfell’s steward and Sansa’s dearest friend. “He told her she was very beautiful.”
“乔佛里喜欢你姐姐哟。”珍妮悄声道，语气中带着自豪，仿佛这件事是她一手促成似的。她是临冬城总管的女儿，也是珊莎最要好的朋友。“他跟她说她很漂亮。”
“He’s going to marry her,” little Beth said dreamily, hugging herself. “Then Sansa will be queen of all the realm.”
“有一天他会娶她作新娘子。”小贝丝双手环膝，用一种如梦似幻的语调说，“然后珊莎就会变成全世界的王后啰。”
Sansa had the grace to blush. She blushed prettily. She did everything prettily, Arya thought with dull resentment. “Beth, you shouldn’t make up stories,” Sansa corrected the younger girl, gently stroking her hair to take the harshness out of her words. She looked at Arya. “What did you think of Prince Joff, sister? He’s very gallant, don’t you think?”
珊莎很有礼貌地脸红了。她脸红起来还是很漂亮，她不管做什么都漂漂亮亮，艾莉亚一肚子不满地想。“贝丝，不要这样瞎编故事。”珊莎纠正身旁的小女孩，同时轻轻拨弄她的发丝，好让自己的话听起来不那么严厉。她转向艾莉亚：“好妹妹，你觉得小乔王子怎么样？他实在是个很勇敢的人，你说是不是？”
“Jon says he looks like a girl,” Arya said.
“琼恩说他看起来像个女孩子。”艾莉亚回答。
Sansa sighed as she stitched. “Poor Jon,” she said. “He gets jealous because he’s a bastard.”
珊莎叹了口气，继续手中的针线活。“可怜的琼恩，”她说，“作私生子的难免嫉妒别人。”
“He’s our brother,” Arya said, much too loudly. Her voice cut through the afternoon quiet of the tower room.
“他是我们的哥哥。”艾莉亚回嘴，却说得大声了。她的声音划破了塔顶房间午后的静谧。
Septa Mordane raised her eyes. She had a bony face, sharp eyes, and a thin lipless mouth made for frowning. It was frowning now. “What are you talking about, children?”
茉丹修女抬起眼。她有张细瘦的脸，一双锐利的眼睛，还有一张薄得几乎看不到唇的嘴，这张脸仿佛生来就是用于皱眉生气似的。这下她立刻皱起眉头来了。“孩子们，你们在说些什么呀？”
“Our half brother,” Sansa corrected, soft and precise. She smiled for the septa. “Arya and I were remarking on how pleased we were to have the princess with us today,” she said.
“同父异母的哥哥，”珊莎轻柔而准确地纠正她，同时朝修女露出微笑，“艾莉亚和我刚才正在说：今天能与公主作伴，真是件快乐的事。”
Septa Mordane nodded. “Indeed. A great honor for us all.” Princess Myrcella smiled uncertainly at the compliment. “Arya, why aren’t you at work?” the septa asked. She rose to her feet, starched skirts rustling as she started across the room. “Let me see your stitches.”
茉丹修女点头：“没错，对我们所有人来说都是莫大的荣幸。”弥赛菈公主听到这样的恭维，有点迟疑地笑了笑。“艾莉亚，你怎么不织东西呢？”她问，随即起身走来，浆过的裙子在身后沙沙作响。“让我看看你织出了什么。”
Arya wanted to scream. It was just like Sansa to go and attract the septa’s attention. “Here,” she said, surrendering up her work.
艾莉亚好想扯开嗓子大声尖叫，都是珊莎把修女给引过来的。“喏。”她边说边无奈地交出“成果”。
The septa examined the fabric. “Arya, Arya, Arya,” she said. “This will not do. This will not do at all.”
修女仔细检视着手中的织锦。“艾莉亚、艾莉亚、艾莉亚，”她说：“这样不行啊！你这样完全不行啊！”
Everyone was looking at her. It was too much. Sansa was too well bred to smile at her sister’s disgrace, but Jeyne was smirking on her behalf. Even Princess Myrcella looked sorry for her. Arya felt tears filling her eyes. She pushed herself out of her chair and bolted for the door.
每个人都在看她，这真是太过分了。珊莎很有教养，不会因为自己妹妹出丑而展露嘲笑，但珍妮却在一旁窃笑，连弥赛菈公主也一副怜悯的模样。艾莉亚只觉得眼里充满泪水，她倏地从椅子上站起，往门的方向冲了过去。
Septa Mordane called after her. “Arya, come back here! Don’t you take another step! Your lady mother will hear of this. In front of our royal princess too! You’ll shame us all!”
茉丹修女在她背后叫道：“艾莉亚，你给我回来，你再走一步试试看！我会把这件事告诉你母亲大人。竟然在我们公主面前做出这种事，你可把我们的脸全丢光了！”
Arya stopped at the door and turned back, biting her lip. The tears were running down her cheeks now. She managed a stiff little bow to Myrcella. “By your leave, my lady.”
于是艾莉亚在门边停下脚步，咬着嘴唇转过身，眼泪却已经流下脸颊。她勉强对弥赛微一鞠躬：“公主小姐，请恕我先告退。”
Myrcella blinked at her and looked to her ladies for guidance. But if she was uncertain, Septa Mordane was not. “Just where do you think you are going, Arya?” the septa demanded.
弥赛菈朝她眨了眨眼，转向身旁的仕女们寻求协助。但她虽然犹疑不决，茉丹修女可是斩钉截铁：“艾莉亚，你要上哪儿去呀？”
Arya glared at her. “I have to go shoe a horse,” she said sweetly, taking a brief satisfaction in the shock on the septa’s face. Then she whirled and made her exit, running down the steps as fast as her feet would take her.
艾莉亚瞪着她，“我去帮马儿装蹄铁。”她甜甜地说，并从修女脸上的惊讶表情中得到一丝满足。语毕她旋身离开房间，以最快的速度飞奔下楼。
It wasn’t fair. Sansa had everything. Sansa was two years older; maybe by the time Arya had been born, there had been nothing left. Often it felt that way. Sansa could sew and dance and sing. She wrote poetry. She knew how to dress. She played the high harp and the bells. Worse, she was beautiful. Sansa had gotten their mother’s fine high cheekbones and the thick auburn hair of the Tullys. Arya took after their lord father. Her hair was a lusterless brown, and her face was long and solemn. Jeyne used to call her Arya Horseface, and neigh whenever she came near. It hurt that the one thing Arya could do better than her sister was ride a horse. Well, that and manage a household. Sansa had never had much of a head for figures. If she did marry Prince Joff, Arya hoped for his sake that he had a good steward.
上天真是太不公平，凭什么珊莎就拥有一切？有时候艾莉亚会这么觉得。自己出生的时候，珊莎已经两岁多了，早已没有任何东西剩下来。珊莎精于缝纫刺绣，又能歌善舞，她会吟诗作词，又懂得如何打扮；她奏起竖琴拨弦宛转，摇起钟铃悦耳轻灵。更糟糕的是，她还是大美人一个。珊莎自母亲那儿继承了徒利家族的玲珑颊骨和浓密的枣红秀发，艾莉亚则活像她父亲，发色深褐，黯淡无光；脸形细长，阴霾不开。珍妮老爱叫她“马脸艾莉亚”，每次遇上她就学起马儿嘶叫。想到自己惟一做得比姐姐好的事情就是骑马，她越发难过起来。不过珊莎不擅长管理家务，对数字也向来一窍不通，倘若哪天她真嫁给乔佛里王子，艾莉亚希望他最好有个好管家，否则后果不堪设想。
Nymeria was waiting for her in the guardroom at the base of the stairs. She bounded to her feet as soon as she caught sight of Arya. Arya grinned. The wolf pup loved her, even if no one else did. They went everywhere together, and Nymeria slept in her room, at the foot of her bed. If Mother had not forbidden it, Arya would gladly have taken the wolf with her to needlework. Let Septa Mordane complain about her stitches then .
娜梅莉亚一直在楼梯底部的守卫室里等着她。一见艾莉亚的身影，她立刻跳将起来，艾莉亚开心地笑了，就算全世界没人爱她，最起码还有这只小狼。她们上哪儿都形影不离，娜梅莉亚晚上就睡在她房间，蜷缩在床脚下。若非母亲不准，她原本想把小狼一起带去针线室。到时候看看茉丹修女还敢不敢批评她的活儿。
Nymeria nipped eagerly at her hand as Arya untied her. She had yellow eyes. When they caught the sunlight, they gleamed like two golden coins. Arya had named her after the warrior queen of the Rhoyne, who had led her people across the narrow sea. That had been a great scandal too. Sansa, of course, had named her pup “Lady.” Arya made a face and hugged the wolfling tight. Nymeria licked her ear, and she giggled.
艾莉亚为她松绑，娜梅莉亚则热切地舔着她的手，她有双黄色的眼珠子，阳光一照，亮得就像两枚金币。艾莉亚用传说中率领子民横渡狭海的战士女王的名讳为小狼命名，自然也引起了不小的骚动。珊莎呢，不消说，把她的小狼叫做“淑女”。想到这儿，艾莉亚扮了个鬼脸，紧紧地抱着小狼。娜梅莉亚舔了舔她耳根，痒得她咯咯直笑。
By now Septa Mordane would certainly have sent word to her lady mother. If she went to her room, they would find her. Arya did not care to be found. She had a better notion. The boys were at practice in the yard. She wanted to see Robb put gallant Prince Joffrey flat on his back. “Come,” she whispered to Nymeria. She got up and ran, the wolf coming hard at her heels.
茉丹修女这时一定已经派人通知她母亲大人了，所以她若是直接回房，一定会被逮个正着。艾莉亚可不想被逮着，她心里有个更好的点子。现在刚好是男孩子们在校场上练习比试的时间，她想看看罗柏亲手把勇敢的乔佛里王子打成鼻青脸肿的模样。“来罢。”她朝娜梅莉亚低语，随即起身迈步飞奔，小狼紧跟在后。
There was a window in the covered bridge between the armory and the Great Keep where you had a view of the whole yard. That was where they headed.
连接主堡和武器库的密闭桥梁上，有扇窗子可以将整个校场尽收眼底，她要去的就是那地方。
They arrived, flushed and breathless, to find Jon seated on the sill, one leg drawn up languidly to his chin. He was watching the action, so absorbed that he seemed unaware of her approach until his white wolf moved to meet them. Nymeria stalked closer on wary feet. Ghost, already larger than his litter mates, smelled her, gave her ear a careful nip, and settled back down.
等她气喘吁吁地跑到目的地，却发现琼恩已经靠坐在窗棂上，一只脚无精打采地翘起顶着下巴。他聚精会神地注意着下方的打斗，直等到他自己的白狼站起来朝她们迎去方才回过神来。娜梅莉亚小心翼翼地靠了过去，白灵已经长得比其他几只狼都要高大，它嗅了嗅她，轻轻地咬了一下她的耳朵，然后返身趴下。
Jon gave her a curious look. “Shouldn’t you be working on your stitches, little sister?”
琼恩狐疑地看着她：“小妹，你这会儿不是该上缝纫课么？”
Arya made a face at him. “I wanted to see them fight.”
艾莉亚朝他扮个鬼脸。“我想看他们打架。”
He smiled. “Come here, then.”
他笑道：“那就快过来吧。”
Arya climbed up on the window and sat beside him, to a chorus of thuds and grunts from the yard below.
艾莉亚爬上窗台，在他身边坐下，下面校场上的铿锵响声顿时传入耳中。
To her disappointment, it was the younger boys drilling. Bran was so heavily padded he looked as though he had belted on a featherbed, and Prince Tommen, who was plump to begin with, seemed positively round. They were huffing and puffing and hitting at each other with padded wooden swords under the watchful eye of old Ser Rodrik Cassel, the master-at-arms, a great stout keg of a man with magnificent white cheek whiskers. A dozen spectators, man and boy, were calling out encouragement, Robb’s voice the loudest among them. She spotted Theon Greyjoy beside him, his black doublet emblazoned with the golden kraken of his House, a look of wry contempt on his face. Both of the combatants were staggering. Arya judged that they had been at it awhile.
可令她大失所望的是，在场子上比划的只有年纪比较小的几个男孩子。布兰全身上下穿着护具，看起来活像被绑在一张羽毛床上。而托曼王子本来就胖，这一模样更是浑圆无比。他们正在老罗德利克爵士的监视下，挥舞木制钝剑相互攻击。老爵士是城里的教头，身材高大魁梧，有一把气派非凡的雪白胡须。十几个在旁围观的人正为两个小男孩加油打气，里面喊声最大的就是罗柏。艾莉亚看到席恩·葛雷乔伊站在罗柏旁边，穿着黑色紧身上衣，上面绣有他的金色海怪家徽，脸上则挂着一抹嘲讽的轻蔑。两个比武的男孩子脚步都不太稳，艾莉亚推测他们可能已经打上好一阵子了。
“A shade more exhausting than needlework,” Jon observed.
“看到没有，这恐怕比做针线活儿要累哟。”琼恩表示。
“A shade more fun than needlework,” Arya gave back at him. Jon grinned, reached over, and messed up her hair. Arya flushed. They had always been close. Jon had their father’s face, as she did. They were the only ones. Robb and Sansa and Bran and even little Rickon all took after the Tullys, with easy smiles and fire in their hair. When Arya had been little, she had been afraid that meant that she was a bastard too. It had been Jon she had gone to in her fear, and Jon who had reassured her.
“可也比做针线活儿要好玩多了。”艾莉亚回嘴。琼恩咧嘴一笑，伸手过来拨弄她的头发。艾莉亚脸红了，他们一向很亲，在所有的孩子里，就数琼恩和她遗传到父亲的长脸。罗柏、珊莎和布兰都长得比较像徒利家的人，就连小瑞肯也是笑容可掬，发红似火。艾莉亚小时候，还曾经害怕自己也是个私生子。她害怕的时候就去找琼恩，因为琼恩总能让她安心。
“Why aren’t you down in the yard?” Arya asked him.
“你怎么没跟他们一起下场子？”艾莉亚问他。
He gave her a half smile. “Bastards are not allowed to damage young princes,” he said. “Any bruises they take in the practice yard must come from trueborn swords.”
他浅浅一笑：“私生子没资格跟王子过招，”他说，“就算练习，也只有正室的孩子可以伤他们。”
“Oh.” Arya felt abashed. She should have realized. For the second time today, Arya reflected that life was not fair.
“噢。”艾莉亚觉得好生尴尬，她早该想到这点才对。在同一天里，她第二次感叹生命的不公平。
She watched her little brother whack at Tommen. “I could do just as good as Bran,” she said. “He’s only seven. I’m nine.”
她看着自己的小弟挥剑朝托曼砍去。“我打起来不输布兰，”她说，“他才七岁，我已经九岁了。”
Jon looked her over with all his fourteen-year-old wisdom. “You’re too skinny,” he said. He took her arm to feel her muscle. Then he sighed and shook his head. “I doubt you could even lift a longsword, little sister, never mind swing one.”
琼恩以一副小大人的姿态打量着她：“你太瘦啦，”他挽起她的手，量度她的肌肉发育，然后摇头叹气，“小妹，我看你连把长剑都举不起，更别说是挥舞格斗了。”
Arya snatched back her arm and glared at him. Jon messed up her hair again. They watched Bran and Tommen circle each other.
艾莉亚抽回手，很不服气地瞪着他看。于是琼恩又伸手拨弄她的一头乱发。两人静静地坐在一起，看着布兰和托曼互相兜圈子。
“You see Prince Joffrey?” Jon asked.
“你看到乔佛里王子了吗？”琼恩问。
She hadn’t, not at first glance, but when she looked again she found him to the back, under the shade of the high stone wall. He was surrounded by men she did not recognize, young squires in the livery of Lannister and Baratheon, strangers all. There were a few older men among them; knights, she surmised.
她原本没有看到，但仔细一瞧，便发现他站在广场后方高大石墙的阴影里，身旁围绕着她不认识的人，他们穿着兰尼斯特家和拜拉席恩家的制服，大概都是年轻侍从吧。人群里还有几个年长的，她猜多半是成年骑士。
“Look at the arms on his surcoat,” Jon suggested.
“你瞧瞧他外套上的家徽。”琼恩提出。
Arya looked. An ornate shield had been embroidered on the prince’s padded surcoat. No doubt the needlework was exquisite. The arms were divided down the middle; on one side was the crowned stag of the royal House, on the other the lion of Lannister.
艾莉亚一看，只见王子外衣上绣了一面华丽无比的盾牌，毫无疑问是极为精巧的手工。这盾牌被分为左右两半，一边是代表王室的宝冠雄鹿，另一边则是兰尼斯特家族的怒吼雄狮。
“The Lannisters are proud,” Jon observed. “You’d think the royal sigil would be sufficient, but no. He makes his mother’s House equal in honor to the king’s.”
“兰尼斯特是个骄傲的家族，”琼恩说，“本来他衣服绣上王族的家徽就够了，但是他却把母亲那边的家徽也绣了上去，而且还和王室的纹章平起平坐。”
“The woman is important too!” Arya protested.
“女人也很重要呀！”艾莉亚不禁反驳。
Jon chuckled. “Perhaps you should do the same thing, little sister. Wed Tully to Stark in your arms.”
琼恩呵呵笑道：“小妹呀，那么你也应该有样学样，把针线活学好，然后将徒利和史塔克两家的徽章都绣在衣服上。”
“A wolf with a fish in its mouth?” It made her laugh. “That would look silly. Besides, if a girl can’t fight, why should she have a coat of arms?”
“绣一匹嘴里叼鱼的狼么？”她想想就觉得好笑，“那样看起来好蠢。更何况，又不准女孩子上战场打仗，那她要家徽做什么用？”
Jon shrugged. “Girls get the arms but not the swords. Bastards get the swords but not the arms. I did not make the rules, little sister.”
琼恩耸耸肩：“女孩子有家徽却不能拿剑作战，私生子能拿剑却没家徽可绣。小妹，世上的规矩不是我订的，我也无能为力呀。”
There was a shout from the courtyard below. Prince Tommen was rolling in the dust, trying to get up and failing. All the padding made him look like a turtle on its back. Bran was standing over him with upraised wooden sword, ready to whack him again once he regained his feet. The men began to laugh.
下方广场传来一声大喊，只见托曼王子倒在翻飞尘土里打滚，想站起来却力不从心，外加绑的那堆皮垫护甲，使他整个人看起来就像只翻过身的乌龟似地在那儿挣扎。布兰正高举木剑，站在他旁边，准备等他一站起来就立刻补上一剑。
“Enough!” Ser Rodrik called out. He gave the prince a hand and yanked him back to his feet. “Well fought. Lew, Donnis, help them out of their armor.” He looked around. “Prince Joffrey, Robb, will you go another round?”
“住手！”罗德利克爵士吼道，他拉了托曼一把，协助他站起来。“打得很好。路易、唐尼斯，帮他们把护甲脱掉。”他环顾四周，“乔佛里王子，罗柏，你们要不要再来一场？”
Robb, already sweaty from a previous bout, moved forward eagerly. “Gladly.”
罗柏身上虽然还流淌着前一场比试的汗水，却迫不及待地踏步向前：“乐意之至。”
Joffrey moved into the sunlight in response to Rodrik’s summons. His hair shone like spun gold. He looked bored. “This is a game for children, Ser Rodrik.”
乔佛里听到罗德利克爵士的传唤，这会儿也从先前所在的阴影里走进阳光下。他的头发在太阳照射下亮如金箔，但脸上却挂着一副百无聊赖的神色。“罗德利克爵士，这都是小孩子把戏。”
Theon Greyjoy gave a sudden bark of laughter. “You are children,” he said derisively.
席恩·葛雷乔伊不禁放声笑道：“你们俩是小孩子没错呀。”
“Robb may be a child,” Joffrey said. “I am a prince. And I grow tired of swatting at Starks with a play sword.”
“罗柏是不是小孩子我不知道，”乔佛里说，“但我可是堂堂王太子，我不想再跟姓史塔克的家伙拿木头玩具挥来挥去了。”
“You got more swats than you gave, Joff,” Robb said. “Are you afraid?”
“小乔，你中剑的次数可比你挥的次数要多。”罗柏道，“你怕了么？”
Prince Joffrey looked at him. “Oh, terrified,” he said. “You’re so much older.” Some of the Lannister men laughed.
乔佛里面无表情地看着他。“噢哟，好恐怖。”他说：“咱们的老战士发话哩。”兰尼斯特家的侍从闻言便笑。
Jon looked down on the scene with a frown. “Joffrey is truly a little shit,” he told Arya.
琼恩皱眉看着场子上发生的事。“乔佛里实在是个不折不扣的浑球。”他告诉艾莉亚。
Ser Rodrik tugged thoughtfully at his white whiskers. “What are you suggesting?” he asked the prince.
罗德利克爵士若有所思地捻捻那撮白胡子，“那请问您有什么想法？”他询问王子。
“Live steel.”
“我要真刀真枪地打。”
“Done,” Robb shot back. “You’ll be sorry!”
“没问题，”罗柏立刻吼回去，“你会后悔的！”
The master-at-arms put a hand on Robb’s shoulder to quiet him. “Live steel is too dangerous. I will permit you tourney swords, with blunted edges.”
教头伸手按住罗柏的肩膀，要他冷静。“用真剑太危险，我只准你们用比武时的钝剑。”
Joffrey said nothing, but a man strange to Arya, a tall knight with black hair and burn scars on his face, pushed forward in front of the prince. “This is your prince. Who are you to tell him he may not have an edge on his sword, ser?”
乔佛里没答腔，却有一个身躯高大，半边脸有着明显灼烧痕迹的黑发男子推开旁边的人，挡在王子面前：“爵士先生，这可是你的王太子，你算什么，有何资格要他不准用这不准用那？”
“Master-at-arms of Winterfell, Clegane, and you would do well not to forget it.”
“克里冈，我算临冬城的教头，你最好牢牢记住。”
“Are you training women here?” the burned man wanted to know. He was muscled like a bull.
“你们这儿是专门训练女人的吗？”带烧伤的高个子问，他浑身肌肉，壮得像头牛。
“I am training knights,” Ser Rodrik said pointedly. “They will have steel when they are ready. When they are of an age.”
“我训练的是骑士，”罗德利克爵士口气锐利地说，“等他们长大成人，技巧足够纯熟，我自会让他们使用真正的武器。”
The burned man looked at Robb. “How old are you, boy?”
带烧伤的男子转头问罗柏：“小子，你几岁？”
“Fourteen,” Robb said.
“十四岁。”罗柏应道。
“I killed a man at twelve. You can be sure it was not with a blunt sword.”
“我十二岁就杀过人，告诉你，我用的可不是钝剑。”
Arya could see Robb bristle. His pride was wounded. He turned on Ser Rodrik. “Let me do it. I can beat him.”
艾莉亚看得出罗柏的自尊心已然受创，正火冒三丈，快要按捺不住怒气。他对罗德利克爵士说：“让我用真剑罢，我可以打败他。”
“Beat him with a tourney blade, then,” Ser Rodrik said.
“不，用钝剑打。”罗德利克爵士回答。
Joffrey shrugged. “Come and see me when you’re older, Stark. If you’re not too old.” There was laughter from the Lannister men.
乔佛里耸耸肩：“史塔克，我看你就等长大之后再来跟我较量好了，不过也别等到走不动了才来喔。”兰尼斯特的人又是一阵哄笑。
Robb’s curses rang through the yard. Arya covered her mouth in shock. Theon Greyjoy seized Robb’s arm to keep him away from the prince. Ser Rodrik tugged at his whiskers in dismay.
罗柏的咒骂响彻整个校场。艾莉亚吃惊地捂住嘴巴。席恩·葛雷乔伊捉住罗柏的手，没让他朝王子冲去，罗德利克爵士则忧心忡忡地捻着胡子。
Joffrey feigned a yawn and turned to his younger brother. “Come, Tommen,” he said. “The hour of play is done. Leave the children to their frolics.”
乔佛里装模作样地打个呵欠，然后转身对他弟弟说：“走罢，托曼，游戏时间结束了。让孩子们留下来继续玩吧。”
That brought more laughter from the Lannisters, more curses from Robb. Ser Rodrik’s face was beet-red with fury under the white of his whiskers. Theon kept Robb locked in an iron grip until the princes and their party were safely away.
此话一出，兰尼斯特的部属们笑得更开心，罗柏也骂得更大声。罗德利克爵士气得满脸通红，席恩则是紧紧地抱住罗柏，直到王子一行离去之后才肯松手。
Jon watched them leave, and Arya watched Jon. His face had grown as still as the pool at the heart of the godswood. Finally he climbed down off the window. “The show is done,” he said. He bent to scratch Ghost behind the ears. The white wolf rose and rubbed against him. “You had best run back to your room, little sister. Septa Mordane will surely be lurking. The longer you hide, the sterner the penance. You’ll be sewing all through winter. When the spring thaw comes, they will find your body with a needle still locked tight between your frozen fingers.”
琼恩目送他们离去，艾莉亚则看着琼恩，他的脸沉静得有如神木林中那泓冷泉。最后他爬下窗台：“好戏结束了。”他弯下身子搔搔白灵的耳后根，小狼也站起身，向他靠过去撒娇。“小妹，你最好还是快回房去。茉丹修女一定正等着修理你，你躲得越久，到时候处罚就越重，弄不好她会叫你织一整个冬天的东西，等到春天冰雪融化，我们就会发现你冰冷的尸体，而缝衣针还牢牢地握在结冰的手里哟。”
Arya didn’t think it was funny. “I hate needlework!” she said with passion. “It’s not fair!”
艾莉亚听了完全笑不出来。“我最讨厌女红！”她激动地说，“真不公平！”
“Nothing is fair,” Jon said. He messed up her hair again and walked away from her, Ghost moving silently beside him. Nymeria started to follow too, then stopped and came back when she saw that Arya was not coming.
“这世上没有公平这回事，”琼恩应道，他又拨拨她的乱发，起身走了，白灵安静地跟在他后面。娜梅莉亚正准备跟去，走了几步回头才发现主人没跟来。
Reluctantly she turned in the other direction.
于是她只好很不情愿地朝反方向去。
It was worse than Jon had thought. It wasn’t Septa Mordane waiting in her room. It was Septa Mordane and her mother.
事情比琼恩料想的还惨，因为等在她房里的可不只是茉丹修女，而是茉丹修女和母亲两个人。
