*CATELYN
卓戈沉默了一阵子，最后他说：“这个卖毒药的人，想从我生命中的月亮身边逃走，那就让他跟在她后面跑，让他跑。乔戈，安达尔人乔拉，我对你们两人说，从我的马群里挑选任何一匹——除了我自己的红马和我送给我生命的月亮做为新娘礼的银马——它就是你们的了。我送给你们这件礼物，是为了感谢你们的功绩。”
I t was too far to make out the banners clearly, but even through the drifting fog she could see that they were white, with a dark smudge in their center that could only be the direwolf of Stark, grey upon its icy field. When she saw it with her own eyes, Catelyn reined up her horse and bowed her head in thanks. The gods were good. She was not too late.
“至于卓戈之子雷戈，骑着世界的骏马，我也要送他一件礼物。我要送他那张他母亲的父亲曾经坐过的铁椅子，我要送他七大王国。我，卓戈，卡奥，要做这件事。”他的音量渐高，举起拳头对天呼喊，“我要带着我的卡拉萨向西走到世界尽头，骑着木马横渡黑色咸水，做出古往今来其他卡奥都从来没有做过的事。我要杀死穿铁衣服的人，拆了他们的石头房子，我要强奸他们的女人，抓他们的小孩来做奴隶，把他们无用的神像带回维斯·多斯拉克，向圣母山行礼。我，拔尔勃之子卓戈在此发誓，在圣母山前发誓，以天上群星为证。”
“They await our coming, my lady,” Ser Wylis Manderly said, “as my lord father swore they would.”
两天后，他的卡拉萨离开维斯·多斯拉克，往西南穿越草原。卓戈卡奥骑着红色骏马领路在前，丹妮莉丝骑着小银马紧跟在他身边。至于那个酒贩，则裸着身子，赤脚跑在后面。他的脖颈和手腕绑着锁链，锁链很长，一直系到丹妮银马的辔头上。她一边骑，他一边跟着她跑，赤裸双脚，步履踉跄。他不会受到任何伤害……只要他跟上。
“Let us not keep them waiting any longer, ser.” Ser Brynden Tully put the spurs to his horse and trotted briskly toward the banners. Catelyn rode beside him.
第五十六章 凯特琳
Ser Wylis and his brother Ser Wendel followed, leading their levies, near fifteen hundred men: some twenty-odd knights and as many squires, two hundred mounted lances, swordsmen, and freeriders, and the rest foot, armed with spears, pikes and tridents. Lord Wyman had remained behind to see to the defenses of White Harbor. A man of near sixty years, he had grown too stout to sit a horse. “If I had thought to see war again in my lifetime, I should have eaten a few less eels,” he’d told Catelyn when he met her ship, slapping his massive belly with both hands. His fingers were fat as sausages. “My boys will see you safe to your son, though, have no fear.”
虽然距离尚远，无法看清旗帜上的图案，但透过迷朦雾气，她依旧瞧得出那是白色旌旗，中间暗色一点只可能是史塔克家族的灰色冰原奔狼。一会儿，待亲眼目睹之后，凯特琳勒住马缰，低头感谢天上诸神，她总算没有来得太迟。
His “boys” were both older than Catelyn, and she might have wished that they did not take after their father quite so closely. Ser Wylis was only a few eels short of not being able to mount his own horse; she pitied the poor animal. Ser Wendel, the younger boy, would have been the fattest man she’d ever known, had she only neglected to meet his father and brother. Wylis was quiet and formal, Wendel loud and boisterous; both had ostentatious walrus mustaches and heads as bare as a baby’s bottom; neither seemed to own a single garment that was not spotted with food stains. Yet she liked them well enough; they had gotten her to Robb, as their father had vowed, and nothing else mattered.
“夫人，他们正等着我们过去呢，”威里斯·曼德勒爵士道，“如我父亲所保证的。”
She was pleased to see that her son had sent eyes out, even to the east. The Lannisters would come from the south when they came, but it was good that Robb was being careful. My son is leading a host to war , she thought, still only half believing it. She was desperately afraid for him, and for Winterfell, yet she could not deny feeling a certain pride as well. A year ago he had been a boy. What was he now? she wondered.
“那我们就别让他们再等下去吧，爵士先生。”布林登·徒利爵士轻踢马刺，快步朝前奔去，凯特琳策马与之并肩而行。
Outriders spied the Manderly banners—the white merman with trident in hand, rising from a blue-green sea—and hailed them warmly. They were led to a spot of high ground dry enough for a camp. Ser Wylis called a halt there, and remained behind with his men to see the fires laid and the horses tended, while his brother Wendel rode on with Catelyn and her uncle to present their father’s respects to their liege lord.
威里斯爵士和他的弟弟文德尔爵士跟在后面，率领着为数将近一千五百名士兵：其中包括二十来位骑士和相同数目的侍从，两百名或持枪或佩剑的骑马战士与自由骑手，其余则是配备长矛、长枪和三叉戟的步兵。威曼伯爵留在后方负责白港的防御，他已年过六旬，体态臃肿得无法再骑马作战。“我若知道这辈子还会遇上打仗，就应该少吃几条鳗鱼。”前来接船时，他这么对凯特琳说，一边还双手拍拍大肚子，那指头肥得跟香肠没两样。“不过呢，您用不着担心，我家这两个小鬼会护送您平安达到您儿子那边的。”
The ground under their horses’ hooves was soft and wet. It fell away slowly beneath them as they rode past smoky peat fires, lines of horses, and wagons heavy-laden with hardbread and salt beef. On a stony outcrop of land higher than the surrounding country, they passed a lord’s pavilion with walls of heavy sailcloth. Catelyn recognized the banner, the bull moose of the Hornwoods, brown on its dark orange field.
他的两个“小鬼”年纪都比凯特琳大，她还真希望他父子三人不要长得那么相像。威里斯爵士若是再重一点，大概也骑不成马了；她真心怜悯他的坐骑。年纪较轻的文德尔爵士也算得上是她所知最胖的人——假如她没遇见他父亲和哥哥的话。威里斯为人沉默多礼，文德尔则粗声粗气，两人都有大把海象式的长胡子，头秃得像新生婴儿的屁股，而且几乎每件衣服都沾染了食物痕迹。不过，她挺喜欢他们，他们依约护送她到了罗柏身边，如他们父亲所保证的，这样就足够了。
Just beyond, through the mists, she glimpsed the walls and towers of Moat Cailin … or what remained of them. Immense blocks of black basalt, each as large as a crofter’s cottage, lay scattered and tumbled like a child’s wooden blocks, half-sunk in the soft boggy soil. Nothing else remained of a curtain wall that had once stood as high as Winterfell’s. The wooden keep was gone entirely, rotted away a thousand years past, with not so much as a timber to mark where it had stood. All that was left of the great stronghold of the First Men were three towers … three where there had once been twenty, if the taletellers could be believed.
看到儿子连东边也派出了斥候，她感到很高兴。兰尼斯特军出现时会在南方，但罗柏谨慎行事毕竟是好的。我儿正领军出征，她心里想，依然不太敢相信。她非常为他，也为临冬城担心害怕，但她不能否认心里也同样感到骄傲。一年之前，他还只是个孩子，如今的他变成什么样了？她不禁纳闷。
The Gatehouse Tower looked sound enough, and even boasted a few feet of standing wall to either side of it. The Drunkard’s Tower, off in the bog where the south and west walls had once met, leaned like a man about to spew a bellyful of wine into the gutter. And the tall, slender Children’s Tower, where legend said the children of the forest had once called upon their nameless gods to send the hammer of the waters, had lost half its crown. It looked as if some great beast had taken a bite out of the crenellations along the tower top, and spit the rubble across the bog. All three towers were green with moss. A tree was growing out between the stones on the north side of the Gatehouse Tower, its gnarled limbs festooned with ropy white blankets of ghostskin.
骑马斥候看见了曼德勒家族的旗帜——手握三叉戟的白色人鱼，自蓝绿海洋中缓缓升起——便热情地招呼他们。他们被领到一处干燥、可供扎营的高地，威里斯爵士命令军队停在那里，升起营火，照料马匹。他的弟弟文德尔则陪伴凯特琳和她叔叔，代表他父亲去向少主致意。
“Gods have mercy,” Ser Brynden exclaimed when he saw what lay before them. “This is Moat Cailin? It’s no more than a—”
马蹄下的土地湿软不堪，随着踩踏缓缓下陷。他们行经煤烟袅袅的营火，一排排的战马，满载硬面包和咸牛肉的货车。在一个地势较高的裸岩上，他们经过了一座用厚重帆布搭建而成的领主帐篷。凯特琳认出霍伍德家族的旗帜，褐色驼鹿衬着暗橙色底。
“—death trap,” Catelyn finished. “I know how it looks, Uncle. I thought the same the first time I saw it, but Ned assured me that this ruin is more formidable than it seems. The three surviving towers command the causeway from all sides, and any enemy must pass between them. The bogs here are impenetrable, full of quicksands and suckholes and teeming with snakes. To assault any of the towers, an army would need to wade through waist-deep black muck, cross a moat full of lizard-lions, and scale walls slimy with moss, all the while exposing themselves to fire from archers in the other towers.” She gave her uncle a grim smile. “And when night falls, there are said to be ghosts, cold vengeful spirits of the north who hunger for southron blood.”
稍远处，透过雾气，她瞥见了卡林湾的高墙塔楼……或者应该说，高墙塔楼的遗迹。一块块大如农舍的黑色玄武岩四处倾颓，活像小孩的积木，半沉进湿软的沼地泥泞。而由它们所筑成的、曾与临冬城等高的城墙，业已完全消失；木造的堡楼更在千年前便已腐烂蛀蚀，如今连半根木头都不剩，再也看不出辉煌一时的痕迹。先民所建筑的雄伟要塞只剩三座高塔……而说书人却说古时曾有二十座。
Ser Brynden chuckled. “Remind me not to linger here. Last I looked, I was southron myself.”
“城门塔”看来还算完整，左右两边甚至还有几尺城墙。“醉鬼塔”陷在泽地边缘，位于过去南墙和西墙交会的地方，如今倾斜得厉害，有如一位准备吐出满肚子酒水的醉汉。相传，森林之子便是在高瘦尖细的“森林之子塔”顶召唤他们的无名诸神，送出巨浪的惩罚，如今塔尖少了一半，看上去像是有只大怪兽咬了一口塔楼雉堞，随后又把它吐进沼泽。三座塔楼均爬满青苔，有棵树从城门塔北面石墙缝隙间长出，盘根错节，表面覆盖着幽灵般苍白的坏死树皮。
Standards had been raised atop all three towers. The Karstark sunburst hung from the Drunkard’s Tower, beneath the direwolf; on the Children’s Tower it was the Greatjon’s giant in shattered chains. But on the Gatehouse Tower, the Stark banner flew alone. That was where Robb had made his seat. Catelyn made for it, with Ser Brynden and Ser Wendel behind her, their horses stepping slowly down the log-and-plank road that had been laid across the green-and-black fields of mud.
“诸神慈悲，”看到眼前的景象，布林登爵士不禁吃了一惊，“这就是卡林湾？这不过是个——”
She found her son surrounded by his father’s lords bannermen, in a drafty hall with a peat fire smoking in a black hearth. He was seated at a massive stone table, a pile of maps and papers in front of him, talking intently with Roose Bolton and the Greatjon. At first he did not notice her … but his wolf did. The great grey beast was lying near the fire, but when Catelyn entered he lifted his head, and his golden eyes met hers. The lords fell silent one by one, and Robb looked up at the sudden quiet and saw her. “Mother!” he said, his voice thick with emotion.
“——死亡陷阱。”凯特琳接口道：“叔叔，我知道这里看起来很不起眼，我初次见到时也这么想，但奈德向我保证，这片‘废墟’远比看起来要易守难攻。残存的三塔从三个方面控制堤道，任何北上的敌人都必须从他们中间通过，因为沼泽充满流沙和陷坑，毒蛇肆虐其间，无法穿越。而若要攻打其中一塔，军队必须涉过深至腰部的黑色泥泞，跨越蜥狮出没的护城河，再登上长满青苔、滑溜异常的城墙，同时从头到尾都暴露在另外两塔弓箭手的箭雨之下。”她故作严峻地朝叔叔一笑，“入夜之后，据说这里闹鬼，有很多充满恨意的北方幽魂等着吸南方人的鲜血。”
Catelyn wanted to run to him, to kiss his sweet brow, to wrap him in her arms and hold him so tightly that he would never come to harm … but here in front of his lords, she dared not. He was playing a man’s part now, and she would not take that away from him. So she held herself at the far end of the basalt slab they were using for a table. The direwolf got to his feet and padded across the room to where she stood. It seemed bigger than a wolf ought to be. “You’ve grown a beard,” she said to Robb, while Grey Wind sniffed her hand.
布林登爵士笑道：“记得提醒我别在此逗留太久。我上次照镜子时，看到自己还是个南方人哪。”
He rubbed his stubbled jaw, suddenly awkward. “Yes.” His chin hairs were redder than the ones on his head.
三座塔顶均竖起了旗帜。醉鬼塔上的是卡史塔克家族的日芒旗，飘扬于冰原狼旗帜下；森林之子塔上则是大琼恩的碎链巨人；但城门塔顶仅有史塔克家族的旗帜，罗柏当是选该处作为指挥部。于是凯特琳朝那里走去，布林登爵士和文德尔爵士跟在后面，他们的坐骑缓缓走过铺于黑绿泥泞上的木板桥。
“I like it.” Catelyn stroked the wolf’s head, gently. “It makes you look like my brother Edmure.” Grey Wind nipped at her fingers, playful, and trotted back to his place by the fire.
她在一个通风的大厅找到儿子。此时，他的身边围绕着父亲的封臣，黑火炉里烧着燃煤，他坐在一张巨大的石桌前，面前堆满地图和各式纸张，正聚精会神地与卢斯·波顿和大琼恩讨论战略。他起初没注意到她……是他的狼先发现了。那头大灰狼原本趴在火炉边，凯特琳刚进门，它便抬起头，金色的眸子与她四目相交。诸侯们纷纷安静下来，罗柏察觉到突来的静默，也抬起头。“母亲？”他的声音充满感情。
Ser Helman Tallhart was the first to follow the direwolf across the room to pay his respects, kneeling before her and pressing his brow to her hand. “Lady Catelyn,” he said, “you are fair as ever, a welcome sight in troubled times.” The Glovers followed, Galbart and Robett, and Greatjon Umber, and the rest, one by one. Theon Greyjoy was the last. “I had not looked to see you here, my lady,” he said as he knelt.
凯特琳好想飞奔过去，亲吻他甜美的双眉，将他紧紧搂住，再不让他受任何伤害……然而在众多诸侯面前，她不敢这么做。眼下他扮演的是男人的角色，她说什么也不能剥夺他的权力。于是她让自己站在人们权作长桌的玄武岩石板末端。冰原狼起身，轻步穿过大厅，走到她身边。她没见过这么大的狼。“你留了胡子。”她对罗柏说，灰风则嗅嗅她的手。
“I had not thought to be here,” Catelyn said, “until I came ashore at White Harbor, and Lord Wyman told me that Robb had called the banners. You know his son, Ser Wendel,” Wendel Manderly stepped forward and bowed as low as his girth would allow. “And my uncle, Ser Brynden Tully, who has left my sister’s service for mine.”
他摸摸长满胡茬的下巴，好像突然觉得不太习惯。“是啊。”他的胡须比头发更红。
“The Blackfish,” Robb said. “Thank you for joining us, ser. We need men of your courage. And you, Ser Wendel, I am glad to have you here. Is Ser Rodrik with you as well, Mother? I’ve missed him.”
“我挺喜欢你这样子，”凯特琳温柔地摸摸狼头，“你看起来很像我弟弟艾德慕。”灰风玩闹似地咬咬她的手指，然后快步跑回火边。
“Ser Rodrik is on his way north from White Harbor. I have named him castellan and commanded him to hold Winterfell till our return. Maester Luwin is a wise counsellor, but unskilled in the arts of war.”
赫曼·陶哈爵士率先追随冰原狼穿过房间向她致意，他在她面前单膝跪下，将额头按上她的手。“凯特琳夫人，”他说，“您依旧如此美丽，在当今的动乱时刻，见到您真是令人宽心。”葛洛佛家的盖伯特和罗贝特、大琼恩以及其他封臣也陆续上前致意。席恩·葛雷乔伊是最后一个。“夫人，没想到会在这里见到您。”说着他单膝跪下。
“Have no fear on that count, Lady Stark,” the Greatjon told her in his bass rumble. “Winterfell is safe. We’ll shove our swords up Tywin Lannister’s bunghole soon enough, begging your pardons, and then it’s on to the Red Keep to free Ned.”
“我也没想到会来这里，”凯特琳道，“我在白港登岸后，威曼大人告诉我罗柏业已召集封臣，我才临时改变了主意。你们应该都认识他的儿子，文德尔爵士。”文德尔·曼德勒走上前来，极尽腰带所能容许的程度，向众人弯腰行礼。“这是我叔叔布林登爵士，他离开了我妹妹，前来协助我方。”
“My lady, a question, as it please you.” Roose Bolton, Lord of the Dreadfort, had a small voice, yet when he spoke larger men quieted to listen. His eyes were curiously pale, almost without color, and his look disturbing. “It is said that you hold Lord Tywin’s dwarf son as captive. Have you brought him to us? I vow, we should make good use of such a hostage.”
“黑鱼大人，”罗柏说，“感谢您加入我们，我们正需要像您这般勇武的人。文德尔爵士，我也很高兴得到您的协助。母亲，罗德利克爵士可有同你一道归来？我很想念他。”
“I did hold Tyrion Lannister, but no longer,” Catelyn was forced to admit. A chorus of consternation greeted the news. “I was no more pleased than you, my lords. The gods saw fit to free him, with some help from my fool of a sister.” She ought not to be so open in her contempt, she knew, but her parting from the Eyrie had not been pleasant. She had offered to take Lord Robert with her, to foster him at Winterfell for a few years. The company of other boys would do him good, she had dared to suggest. Lysa’s rage had been frightening to behold. “Sister or no,” she had replied, “if you try to steal my son, you will leave by the Moon Door.” After that there was no more to be said.
“罗德利克爵士自白港往北去了，我己任命他为代理城主，令他守护临冬城，直到我们返回。鲁温学士虽然学识渊博，毕竟不擅战争之事。”
The lords were anxious to question her further, but Catelyn raised a hand. “No doubt we will have time for all this later, but my journey has fatigued me. I would speak with my son alone. I know you will forgive me, my lords.” She gave them no choice; led by the ever-obliging Lord Hornwood, the bannermen bowed and took their leave. “And you, Theon,” she added when Greyjoy lingered. He smiled and left them.
“史塔克夫人，您毋需担心，”大琼恩声如洪钟地告诉她，“临冬城不会有事。而咱们过不了多久就会拿剑捅进兰尼斯特的屁眼，唉，说话粗鲁还请见谅，然后呢，咱们就一路杀进红堡，把奈德给救出来。”
There was ale and cheese on the table. Catelyn filled a horn, sat, sipped, and studied her son. He seemed taller than when she’d left, and the wisps of beard did make him look older. “Edmure was sixteen when he grew his first whiskers.”
“夫人，如您不见怪，我有个问题想请教。”恐怖堡领主卢斯·波顿的声音极其细小，然而当他开口讲话时，再高大的人都会安静倾听。他的眼瞳颜色淡得出奇，几乎无从描绘，而他的眼神更是令人烦乱。“听说您逮捕了泰温大人的侏儒儿子，不知您是否把他也带来了？我对天发誓，我们会好好利用这个人质。”
“I will be sixteen soon enough,” Robb said.
“我的确逮捕了提利昂·兰尼斯特，只可惜他现下已不在我手上了。”凯特琳不得不承认。此话一出，四周立即响起阵阵错愕之声。“诸位大人，我也不希望此事发生，然而天上诸神有意放他自由，更加上我那妹妹愚行所致。”她自知不应如此明显地流露对妹妹的轻蔑，但鹰巢城一别实在很不愉快。她原本提议带小劳勃公爵同行，让他在临冬城住上一段时日，她更大胆表示，与其他几个男孩作伴，应该对他很有好处。然而莱沙的怒意简直让人看了都害怕。“我管你是不是我姐姐，”她回答，“你敢偷我儿子，就给我从月门出去！”在那之后，什么都不用说了。
“And you are fifteen now. Fifteen, and leading a host to battle. Can you understand why I might fear, Robb?”
北境诸侯急于进一步探询相关消息，但凯特琳举起一只手。“我们稍后一定有时间谈，眼下我长途跋涉，颇感疲惫，只想单独和我儿子讲几句。相信诸位大人必会谅解。”她让他们别无选择，于是在向来遵从命令的霍伍德伯爵率领下，封臣们纷纷鞠躬离开。“席恩，你也是。”看到葛雷乔伊留了下来，她又补上这句。他微笑着走开。
His look grew stubborn. “There was no one else.”
桌上有麦酒和乳酪，凯特琳倒了一角杯，坐下来，小啜一口之后，细细端详儿子。他似乎比她离开时长得高了些，那点胡子也确让他看起来年纪大了不少。“艾德慕是从十六岁开始留胡子的。”
“No one?” she said. “Pray, who were those men I saw here a moment ago? Roose Bolton, Rickard Karstark, Galbart and Robett Glover, the Greatjon, Helman Tallhart … you might have given the command to any of them. Gods be good, you might even have sent Theon, though he would not be my choice.”
“我很快就满十六岁了。”罗柏说。
“They are not Starks,” he said.
“但你现在是十五岁，才十五岁，就带领大军投入战场。罗柏，你能理解我的担忧吗？”
“They are men , Robb, seasoned in battle. You were fighting with wooden swords less than a year past.”
他的眼神倔强起来。“除了我没别人了。”
She saw anger in his eyes at that, but it was gone as quick as it came, and suddenly he was a boy again. “I know,” he said, abashed. “Are you … are you sending me back to Winterfell?”
“没别人？”她说，“你倒是说说，我几分钟前见到的那些人是谁？卢斯·波顿、瑞卡德·卡史塔克、盖伯特·葛洛佛与罗贝特·葛洛佛，还有大琼恩、赫曼·陶哈……你大可把指挥权交给他们中的任何一人。诸神有眼，你就算派席恩都成，虽说我不会选他。”
Catelyn sighed. “I should. You ought never have left. Yet I dare not, not now. You have come too far. Someday these lords will look to you as their liege. If I pack you off now, like a child being sent to bed without his supper, they will remember, and laugh about it in their cups. The day will come when you need them to respect you, even fear you a little. Laughter is poison to fear. I will not do that to you, much as I might wish to keep you safe.”
“他们不是史塔克。”他说。
“You have my thanks, Mother,” he said, his relief obvious beneath the formality.
“他们是成年人，罗柏，他们经验丰富。而不到一年前，你还拿着木剑在练习呢。”
She reached across his table and touched his hair. “You are my firstborn, Robb. I have only to look at you to remember the day you came into the world, red-faced and squalling.”
听到这句话，她看到他眼里闪现怒意，但那火光稍现即逝，转眼间他又变回了大男孩。“我知道，”他困窘地说，“那你……你要把我送回临冬城去吗？”
He rose, clearly uncomfortable with her touch, and walked to the hearth. Grey Wind rubbed his head against his leg. “You know … about Father?”
凯特琳叹口气，“我应该要送你回去的，你原本就不该动身。可现在我不敢这么做，你已经走到了这一步，有朝一日，你会成为这些诸侯的封君，倘若我现在就这么把你给送回去，像把小孩子赶上床。不给他吃晚饭一样，他们便会牢牢记住，并在背后取笑。将来你会需要他们的尊敬，甚至他们的畏惧，而嘲笑是惧怕的毒药，我不会对你这么做，虽然我一心只想保你平安。”
“Yes.” The reports of Robert’s sudden death and Ned’s fall had frightened Catelyn more than she could say, but she would not let her son see her fear. “Lord Manderly told me when I landed at White Harbor. Have you had any word of your sisters?”
“母亲，谢谢你。”他说。脸上那层礼貌下的如释重负之情清晰可见。
“There was a letter,” Robb said, scratching his direwolf under the jaw. “One for you as well, but it came to Winterfell with mine.” He went to the table, rummaged among some maps and papers, and returned with a crumpled parchment. “This is the one she wrote me, I never thought to bring yours.”
她把手伸到桌子对面摸摸他的头发。“罗柏，你是我第一个孩子，我只要看着你，就能想起你红着脸呱呱坠地的那一天。”
Something in Robb’s tone troubled her. She smoothed out the paper and read. Concern gave way to disbelief, then to anger, and lastly to fear. “This is Cersei’s letter, not your sister’s,” she said when she was done. “The real message is in what Sansa does not say. All this about how kindly and gently the Lannisters are treating her … I know the sound of a threat, even whispered. They have Sansa hostage, and they mean to keep her.”
他站起来，显然对于她的碰触感到有些不自在。他走到火炉边，灰风伸头摩擦着他的脚。“你知道……父亲的事吗？”
“There’s no mention of Arya,” Robb pointed out, miserable.
“知道。”劳勃猝死和奈德入狱的消息比任何事都更教凯特琳害怕，但她不能让儿子发现自己的恐惧。“我在白港上岸时，曼德勒大人跟我说了。你有你妹妹们的消息吗？”
“No.” Catelyn did not want to think what that might mean, not now, not here.
“我收到一封信，”罗柏边说边搔冰原狼的下巴。“还有一封是给你的，但和我那封一起寄到了临冬城。”他走到桌边，在地图和纸张间翻找了一会儿，拿出一张摺皱的羊皮纸走回来。“这是她写给我的，我没想到把你的那封也带来。”
“I had hoped … if you still held the Imp, a trade of hostages …” He took Sansa’s letter and crumpled it in his fist, and she could tell from the way he did it that it was not the first time. “Is there word from the Eyrie? I wrote to Aunt Lysa, asking help. Has she called Lord Arryn’s banners, do you know? Will the knights of the Vale come join us?”
罗柏的语气令她有些不安。她摊平纸张读了起来，然而关切随即转为怀疑，接着变成愤怒，最后成了忧惧。“这是瑟曦写的信，不是你妹妹写的。”看完之后她说，“这封信真正的意思，正是珊莎没写出来的部分。什么兰尼斯特家对她多么照顾优待……其实是威胁的口气。他们扣住了珊莎，当成人质和筹码。”
“Only one,” she said, “the best of them, my uncle … but Brynden Blackfish was a Tully first. My sister is not about to stir beyond her Bloody Gate.”
“上面也没提到艾莉亚。”罗柏难过地指出。
Robb took it hard. “Mother, what are we going to do? I brought this whole army together, eighteen thousand men, but I don’t … I’m not certain …” He looked to her, his eyes shining, the proud young lord melted away in an instant, and quick as that he was a child again, a fifteen-year-old boy looking to his mother for answers.
“的确没有。”凯特琳不愿去想这代表着什么意思，尤其在此时此地。
It would not do.
“我本来希望……如果小恶魔还在你手上，我们就可以交换人质……”他拿过珊莎的信，把它揉得稀烂，她看得出这不是他第一次揉了。“鹰巢城那边有消息吗？我已经写信给莱沙阿姨，请她援助。她是否召集了艾林大人的封臣？峡谷骑士会加入我们吗？”
“What are you so afraid of, Robb?” she asked gently.
“只有一个会来，”她说，“最优秀的一个，那就是我叔叔……然而黑鱼布林登毕竟是徒利家的人。我妹妹不打算派兵到血门之外。”
“I …” He turned his head away, to hide the first tear. “If we march … even if we win … the Lannisters hold Sansa, and Father. They’ll kill them, won’t they?”
罗柏深受打击。“母亲，那我们该怎么办？我召集了这支一万八千人的大军，可我不……我不确定……”他看着她，眼里闪着泪光，方才那个年轻气盛的领主转瞬间消失得无影无踪，他又变回了十五岁的大男孩，希望母亲能提供解答。
“They want us to think so.”
这样是不行的。
“You mean they’re lying?”
“罗柏，你在怕什么？”她温柔地问。
“I do not know, Robb. What I do know is that you have no choice. If you go to King’s Landing and swear fealty, you will never be allowed to leave. If you turn your tail and retreat to Winterfell, your lords will lose all respect for you. Some may even go over to the Lannisters. Then the queen, with that much less to fear, can do as she likes with her prisoners. Our best hope, our only true hope, is that you can defeat the foe in the field. If you should chance to take Lord Tywin or the Kingslayer captive, why then a trade might very well be possible, but that is not the heart of it. So long as you have power enough that they must fear you, Ned and your sister should be safe. Cersei is wise enough to know that she may need them to make her peace, should the fighting go against her.”
“我……”他转过头，借以掩饰流下的泪水。“如果我们进兵……就算我们赢了……珊莎还在兰尼斯特手上，父亲也是，他们会被杀的，对不对？”
“What if the fighting doesn’t go against her?” Robb asked. “What if it goes against us?”
“他们正希望我们这么想。”
Catelyn took his hand. “Robb, I will not soften the truth for you. If you lose, there is no hope for any of us. They say there is naught but stone at the heart of Casterly Rock. Remember the fate of Rhaegar’s children.”
“你的意思是他们说谎？”
She saw the fear in his young eyes then, but there was a strength as well. “Then I will not lose,” he vowed.
“我不知道，罗柏，我只知道你别无选择。假如你到君临宣誓效忠，便永远也不可能脱身。若是你夹着尾巴逃回临冬城，那封臣们对你原有的尊敬更将荡然无存，有些人甚至会倒戈投靠兰尼斯特。届时王后便无后顾之忧，可以随意处置手上人犯。我们最大的希望，或者说惟一的希望，便是你能在战场上击败对手。假如你能活捉泰温大人或弑君者，那么交换人质便会非常可行。其实交换人质亦非重点所在，最重要的是，只要你的实力令他们不敢小觑，奈德和你妹妹就会平安无事。瑟曦不笨，知道若是战事对她不利，她可能会需要他们来换取和平。”
“Tell me what you know of the fighting in the riverlands,” she said. She had to learn if he was truly ready.
“若是战争并非对她不利，”罗柏问，“而是对我们不利呢？”
“Less than a fortnight past, they fought a battle in the hills below the Golden Tooth,” Robb said. “Uncle Edmure had sent Lord Vance and Lord Piper to hold the pass, but the Kingslayer descended on them and put them to flight. Lord Vance was slain. The last word we had was that Lord Piper was falling back to join your brother and his other bannermen at Riverrun, with Jaime Lannister on his heels. That’s not the worst of it, though. All the time they were battling in the pass, Lord Tywin was bringing a second Lannister army around from the south. It’s said to be even larger than Jaime’s host.
凯特琳握住他的手。“罗柏，我不打算隐瞒事实，假如你战败，那我们就一点希望都没有了。据说凯岩城的人都是铁石心肠，你要牢牢记住雷加的孩子是什么下场。”
“Father must have known that, because he sent out some men to oppose them, under the king’s own banner. He gave the command to some southron lordling, Lord Erik or Derik or something like that, but Ser Raymun Darry rode with him, and the letter said there were other knights as well, and a force of Father’s own guardsmen. Only it was a trap. Lord Derik had no sooner crossed the Red Fork than the Lannisters fell upon him, the king’s banner be damned, and Gregor Clegane took them in the rear as they tried to pull back across the Mummer’s Ford. This Lord Derik and a few others may have escaped, no one is certain, but Ser Raymun was killed, and most of our men from Winterfell. Lord Tywin has closed off the kingsroad, it’s said, and now he’s marching north toward Harrenhal, burning as he goes.”
她在他年轻的眼睛里见到了恐惧，却也看到了力量。“那么，我一定不能输。”
Grim and grimmer , thought Catelyn. It was worse than she’d imagined. “You mean to meet him here?” she asked.
“把你所知的河间战事告诉我。”她说。她要知道他是否已准备就绪。
“If he comes so far, but no one thinks he will,” Robb said. “I’ve sent word to Howland Reed, Father’s old friend at Greywater Watch. If the Lannisters come up the Neck, the crannogmen will bleed them every step of the way, but Galbart Glover says Lord Tywin is too smart for that, and Roose Bolton agrees. He’ll stay close to the Trident, they believe, taking the castles of the river lords one by one, until Riverrun stands alone. We need to march south to meet him.”
“不到两周前，在金牙城下的丘陵地有一场激战。”罗柏道，“艾德慕舅舅命凡斯大人和派柏大人防守隘口，但弑君者率兵下山猛攻，把他们打得落花流水，凡斯大人以身殉职。根据我们最新得到的消息，派柏大人正向奔流城撤军，以便和舅舅以及他的其他封臣会合，詹姆·兰尼斯特穷追不舍。但这还不是最糟的情报，他们在山口交战的同时，泰温大人正带着另一支军队从南方迂回进逼，据说规模比詹姆的部队大得多。”
The very idea of it chilled Catelyn to the bone. What chance would a fifteen-year-old boy have against seasoned battle commanders like Jaime and Tywin Lannister? “Is that wise? You are strongly placed here. It’s said that the old Kings in the North could stand at Moat Cailin and throw back hosts ten times the size of their own.”
“父亲一定也知道这件事，所以他派人打着国王的旗帜前去阻止。领头的好像是个南方少爷，叫艾里还是德里大人来着，雷蒙·戴瑞爵士也跟着去了，信上说还有其他的骑士，以及一队父亲自己的卫士。然而这却是个陷阱，德里爵士刚渡过红叉河，立刻遭到兰尼斯特军猛烈攻击，国王的旗帜毫无效力，被人随意践踏。后来他们想撤过戏子滩，格雷果·克里冈又从后方突袭。我们不确定德里大人和其他少数人是否逃脱，但雷蒙爵士和我们临冬城的多数卫士都战死了。传说泰温大人的军队已接近国王大道，正往北朝赫伦堡而来，沿途烧杀抢劫。”
“Yes, but our food and supplies are running low, and this is not land we can live off easily. We’ve been waiting for Lord Manderly, but now that his sons have joined us, we need to march.”
消息一个比一个更悲惨，凯特琳心想。情况比她想像中还糟。“你打算在这里等他么？”
She was hearing the lords bannermen speaking with her son’s voice, she realized. Over the years, she had hosted many of them at Winterfell, and been welcomed with Ned to their own hearths and tables. She knew what sorts of men they were, each one. She wondered if Robb did.
“除非他真打算北上来此，但我们都认为他不会。”罗柏道，“我已经派人送信给父亲在灰水望的老朋友霍兰·黎德，假如兰尼斯特军企图穿越沼泽，泽地人会让他们举步维艰、损失惨重。盖柏特·葛洛佛认为以泰温大人的精明，他不会这么做，卢斯·波顿也表示同意。他们相信他会在三河流域一带活动，将河间诸侯的城堡一个一个逐步攻陷，直到最后奔流城孤立无援。所以我们必须南下去会他。”
And yet there was sense in what they said. This host her son had assembled was not a standing army such as the Free Cities were accustomed to maintain, nor a force of guardsmen paid in coin. Most of them were smallfolk: crofters, fieldhands, fishermen, sheepherders, the sons of innkeeps and traders and tanners, leavened with a smattering of sellswords and freeriders hungry for plunder. When their lords called, they came … but not forever. “Marching is all very well,” she said to her son, “but where , and to what purpose? What do you mean to do?”
光这念头便令凯特琳毛骨悚然。单凭他一个十五岁的男孩，怎么可能与詹姆或泰温·兰尼斯特那样经验丰富的沙场老手抗衡？“这样好吗？此地易守难攻，传说古代的北境之王只需守住卡林湾，便可击退十倍于己的敌军。”
Robb hesitated. “The Greatjon thinks we should take the battle to Lord Tywin and surprise him,” he said, “but the Glovers and the Karstarks feel we’d be wiser to go around his army and join up with Uncle Ser Edmure against the Kingslayer.” He ran his fingers through his shaggy mane of auburn hair, looking unhappy. “Though by the time we reach Riverrun … I’m not certain …”
“没错，话是这样说，但我们的粮食补给日渐短缺，待在这里自给自足已不容易。我们原本是在等曼德勒大人，眼下他的儿子既然到了，我们便得动身。”
“Be certain,” Catelyn told her son, “or go home and take up that wooden sword again. You cannot afford to seem indecisive in front of men like Roose Bolton and Rickard Karstark. Make no mistake, Robb—these are your bannermen, not your friends. You named yourself battle commander. Command.”
她突然明白，她听到的是诸侯们透过她儿子的声音在说话。这些年来，她在临冬城多次宴请北方诸侯，也曾与奈德到他们家中作客，她很明白他们是什么样的人，每一家她都摸透了底细，却纳闷罗柏知不知道。
Her son looked at her, startled, as if he could not credit what he was hearing. “As you say, Mother.”
然而他们顾虑的却也有理。她儿子所集结的这支军队既非自由贸易城邦的常备军，亦非领薪水吃饭的守卫队，他们多数是平民百姓：佃农、庄稼汉、渔夫、牧羊人、旅店老板的儿子、生意人和皮革匠，外加少数渴望掠夺的雇佣骑士、自由骑手和流浪武士。当他们的领主发出召集令，他们便前来效命……然而并非永远。“进军当然很好，”她对儿子说，“但要前往何处，有何目的？你有什么打算？”
“I’ll ask you again. What do you mean to do?”
罗柏迟疑片刻，“大琼恩认为我们应该出其不意突袭泰温大人，”他说，“然而葛洛佛家和卡史塔克家的人都觉得避其锋芒，赶紧与艾德慕舅舅合力对付弑君者才是明智之举。”他伸手拨拨蓬乱的枣红头发，看来有些闷闷不乐。“可等我们抵达奔流城……我不确定……”
Robb drew a map across the table, a ragged piece of old leather covered with lines of faded paint. One end curled up from being rolled; he weighed it down with his dagger. “Both plans have virtues, but … look, if we try to swing around Lord Tywin’s host, we take the risk of being caught between him and the Kingslayer, and if we attack him … by all reports, he has more men than I do, and a lot more armored horse. The Greatjon says that won’t matter if we catch him with his breeches down, but it seems to me that a man who has fought as many battles as Tywin Lannister won’t be so easily surprised.”
“你非确定不可，”凯特琳对儿子说，“不然就回家继续拿木剑练习罢。在卢斯·波顿或瑞卡德·卡史塔克这种人面前，你绝不能犹豫不决。罗柏，你别搞错了，他们是你的封臣，不是你的朋友。你既自任为总指挥，就得发号施令。”
“Good,” she said. She could hear echoes of Ned in his voice, as he sat there, puzzling over the map. “Tell me more.”
儿子看着她，显得有些吃惊，仿佛不能完全相信刚才听到的话。“母亲，您说的对。”
“I’d leave a small force here to hold Moat Cailin, archers mostly, and march the rest down the causeway,” he said, “but once we’re below the Neck, I’d split our host in two. The foot can continue down the kingsroad, while our horsemen cross the Green Fork at the Twins.” He pointed. “When Lord Tywin gets word that we’ve come south, he’ll march north to engage our main host, leaving our riders free to hurry down the west bank to Riverrun.” Robb sat back, not quite daring to smile, but pleased with himself and hungry for her praise.
“我再问你一次：你有什么打算？”
Catelyn frowned down at the map. “You’d put a river between the two parts of your army.”
罗柏抽出一张绘满褪色线条的老旧皮质地图，摊平在桌，其中一角因为长期卷动而翘了起来，他用匕首固定住。“两个计划备有优点，可是……你看，假如我们试图绕开泰温大人主力，就得冒被他和弑君者两面夹击的风险，如果我们与他正面交战……根据各种情报显示，他不但总兵力比我多，骑兵的数量更是远远超过我们。虽然大琼恩说只要趁对方脱下裤子的时候攻其不备，人再多都不怕，可在我看来，像泰温·兰尼斯特这样身经百战的人，恐怕不容易被逮到啊。”
“And between Jaime and Lord Tywin,” he said eagerly. The smile came at last. “There’s no crossing on the Green Fork above the ruby ford, where Robert won his crown. Not until the Twins, all the way up here, and Lord Frey controls that bridge. He’s your father’s bannerman, isn’t that so?”
“很好。”她说。看他坐在那里，为地图伤脑筋，从他的话中，她可以听见奈德的声音。“继续说。”
The Late Lord Frey , Catelyn thought. “He is,” she admitted, “but my father has never trusted him. Nor should you.”
“我打算分配少量兵力留下来防守卡林湾，以弓箭手为核心，然后全军沿堤道南下。”他说，“渡过颈泽之后，我将兵分两路，步兵继续走国王大道，骑兵则从孪河城渡过绿叉河。”他指给她看。“泰温大人一旦得知我军南下的消息，当会率军北进与我们主力交战，届时我们的骑兵便可无后顾之忧地从河流西岸赶往奔流城。”说完罗柏坐下来，不太敢露出微笑，但看得出他对自己的表现颇感满意，渴望听到她的称许。
“I won’t,” Robb promised. “What do you think?”
凯特琳皱紧眉，低头看着地图。“你让一条河挡在自己的军队之间。”
She was impressed despite herself. He looks like a Tully , she thought, yet he’s still his father’s son, and Ned taught him well . “Which force would you command?”
“却也挡在詹姆和泰温大人之间！”他急切地说，终于绽开微笑。“绿叉河在红宝石滩以北就没有渡口，劳勃就是在那里赢得了王冠。惟一的渡口是在孪河城，距离很远，更何况桥还掌控在佛雷大人手中。他是外公的封臣，对不对？”
“The horse,” he answered at once. Again like his father; Ned would always take the more dangerous task himself.
迟到的佛雷侯爵，凯特琳心想。“他的确是，”她承认，“但你外公从来不信任他，你也不应该轻信他。”
“And the other?”
“我不会的。”罗柏向她保证。“你觉得这计划如何？”
“The Greatjon is always saying that we should smash Lord Tywin. I thought I’d give him the honor.”
虽然担心，她依旧不得不同意这是个出色的计划。他长得虽像徒利，她心想，心底却是他父亲的儿子，奈德把他教导得很好。“你要指挥哪一队？”
It was his first misstep, but how to make him see it without wounding his fledgling confidence? “Your father once told me that the Greatjon was as fearless as any man he had ever known.”
“骑兵队。”他立刻答道。这也像他父亲：危险的任务，奈德永远自己扛。
Robb grinned. “Grey Wind ate two of his fingers, and he laughed about it. So you agree, then?”
“另一队呢？”
“Your father is not fearless,” Catelyn pointed out. “He is brave, but that is very different.”
“大琼恩老说我们应该迎头痛宰泰温大人，我想给他这个荣誉，让他实现愿望。”
Her son considered that for a moment. “The eastern host will be all that stands between Lord Tywin and Winterfell,” he said thoughtfully. “Well, them and whatever few bowmen I leave here at the Moat. So I don’t want someone fearless, do I?”
这是他犯的第一个错误，但要如何让他明白，而不伤害到他仅见雏形的自尊呢？“你父亲曾经对我说，大琼恩是他平生所见最勇猛无畏的人。”
“No. You want cold cunning, I should think, not courage.”
罗柏嘻嘻笑道：“灰风咬掉他两根手指头，他却哈哈大笑。这么说来你同意啰？”
“Roose Bolton,” Robb said at once. “That man scares me.”
“你父亲并非无畏，”凯特琳指出：“而是勇敢，这是完全不一样的。”
“Then let us pray he will scare Tywin Lannister as well.”
儿子仔细考虑了半晌。“东路军将是惟一能阻挡泰温大人前往临冬城的屏障。”他若有所思地说，“嗯，就只有他们，以及我留在卡林湾的少量弓箭手。所以我不应该让无畏的人来率领，对不对？”
Robb nodded and rolled up the map. “I’ll give the commands, and assemble an escort to take you home to Winterfell.”
“没错。我认为你要的应该是冷静的头脑，而非匹夫之勇。”
Catelyn had fought to keep herself strong, for Ned’s sake and for this stubborn brave son of theirs. She had put despair and fear aside, as if they were garments she did not choose to wear … but now she saw that she had donned them after all.
“那就是卢斯·波顿了。”罗柏马上说，“我很怕那个人。”
“I am not going to Winterfell,” she heard herself say, surprised at the sudden rush of tears that blurred her vision. “My father may be dying behind the walls of Riverrun. My brother is surrounded by foes. I must go to them.”
“就让我们祈祷泰温·兰尼斯特也怕他吧。”
