*EDDARD
第四十四章 艾德
T hrough the high narrow windows of the Red Keep’s cavernous throne room, the light of sunset spilled across the floor, laying dark red stripes upon the walls where the heads of dragons had once hung. Now the stone was covered with hunting tapestries, vivid with greens and browns and blues, and yet still it seemed to Ned Stark that the only color in the hall was the red of blood.
透过红堡深广王座厅的狭窄高窗，夕阳余晖遍洒地面，为墙壁挂上暗红色的条纹。龙头曾经高悬于此，如今石墙虽已为青绿和棕褐相衬、栩栩如生地描绘狩猎情景的挂毯织锦所覆盖，但在奈德眼中，整个大厅依旧浸润在一片血红之中。
He sat high upon the immense ancient seat of Aegon the Conqueror, an ironwork monstrosity of spikes and jagged edges and grotesquely twisted metal. It was, as Robert had warned him, a hellishly uncomfortable chair, and never more so than now, with his shattered leg throbbing more sharply every minute. The metal beneath him had grown harder by the hour, and the fanged steel behind made it impossible to lean back. A king should never sit easy , Aegon the Conqueror had said, when he commanded his armorers to forge a great seat from the swords laid down by his enemies. Damn Aegon for his arrogance , Ned thought sullenly, and damn Robert and his hunting as well .
他高高坐在“征服者”伊耿宽大而古老的座位上。那是张钢铁铸成，满是狰狞尖刺利角和诡异扭曲金属的椅子，它正如劳勃所警告的那般，是张天杀的不舒服的椅子。眼下他的断腿不住抽痛，这种感觉更是无以复加。他身子底下的金属每一小时都越显坚硬，布满利齿般尖刺的椅背，更教他无法倚靠。当年征服者伊耿命令手下铁匠使用敌人投降时的弃械，镕铸成一张大椅时，曾说：“作国王的不能舒舒服服地坐着”。伊耿这傲慢的家伙该死，奈德阴沉地想，劳勃和他的打猎游戏也该死。
“You are quite certain these were more than brigands?” Varys asked softly from the council table beneath the throne. Grand Maester Pycelle stirred uneasily beside him, while Littlefinger toyed with a pen. They were the only councillors in attendance. A white hart had been sighted in the kingswood, and Lord Renly and Ser Barristan had joined the king to hunt it, along with Prince Joffrey, Sandor Clegane, Balon Swann, and half the court. So Ned must needs sit the Iron Throne in his absence.
“你能确定他们不是土匪毛贼？”坐在王座下方议事桌边的瓦里斯轻声问。他身旁的派席尔大学士坐立难安，小指头则摆弄着一枝笔。列席的重臣只有他们几个。前几天有人在御林里瞧见了一只白公鹿，蓝礼大人和巴利斯坦爵士便陪伴国王前去打猎，同行的还有乔佛里王子、桑铎·克里冈、巴隆·史文以及半数廷臣。正因如此，奈德才不得不暂代劳勃坐在铁王座上处理国事。
At least he could sit. Save the council, the rest must stand respectfully, or kneel. The petitioners clustered near the tall doors, the knights and high lords and ladies beneath the tapestries, the smallfolk in the gallery, the mailed guards in their cloaks, gold or grey: all stood.
好歹他还有椅子可坐。在王座厅里，除了王室家族和几位重臣，余人都得毕恭毕敬地或站或跪。前来请愿的人群聚大门边，骑士、贵族与仕女站在挂毯下，平民百姓则在走廊上。全副武装的卫兵肩披金色或灰色的披风，威严挺立。
The villagers were kneeling: men, women, and children, alike tattered and bloody, their faces drawn by fear. The three knights who had brought them here to bear witness stood behind them.
这群村民单膝下跪，不论男女老少，清一色衣着破烂，满身血污，脸上刻满了恐惧。带他们进来作证的三位骑士站在后面。
“Brigands , Lord Varys?” Ser Raymun Darry’s voice dripped scorn. “Oh, they were brigands, beyond a doubt. Lannister brigands.”
“土匪？瓦里斯大人，”雷蒙·戴瑞爵士语透轻蔑。“哼，说得好，他们当然是土匪了。兰尼斯特家的土匪。”
Ned could feel the unease in the hall, as high lords and servants alike strained to listen. He could not pretend to surprise. The west had been a tinderbox since Catelyn had seized Tyrion Lannister. Both Riverrun and Casterly Rock had called their banners, and armies were massing in the pass below the Golden Tooth. It had only been a matter of time until the blood began to flow. The sole question that remained was how best to stanch the wound.
奈德感觉得到大厅里的紧张气氛，在场人等不论出身高低，均屏息竖耳倾听。这也不是什么新鲜事，自凯特琳逮捕提利昂·兰尼斯特之后，西境便宛如一座柴火库。奔流城与凯岩城均已召集封臣，此刻两军正向金牙城下的山口聚集。爆发流血冲突是迟早的事。现在惟一的问题是如何能将伤害减到最小。
Sad-eyed Ser Karyl Vance, who would have been handsome but for the winestain birthmark that discolored his face, gestured at the kneeling villagers. “This is all the remains of the holdfast of Sherrer, Lord Eddard. The rest are dead, along with the people of Wendish Town and the Mummer’s Ford.”
满眼忧伤，若非脸上酒红色的胎记，本来还算英俊的卡列尔·凡斯爵士指着跪在地上的村民说：“艾德大人，榭尔全村就只剩这些人，其他的都和温德镇、戏子滩的居民一样，通通死光了。”
“Rise,” Ned commanded the villagers. He never trusted what a man told him from his knees. “All of you, up.”
“起来，”奈德命令村民们。他向来不相信一个人跪着的时候所说的话。“你们通通都起来。”
In ones and twos, the holdfast of Sherrer struggled to its feet. One ancient needed to be helped, and a young girl in a bloody dress stayed on her knees, staring blankly at Ser Arys Oakheart, who stood by the foot of the throne in the white armor of the Kingsguard, ready to protect and defend the king … or, Ned supposed, the King’s Hand.
榭尔的居民听了纷纷挣扎着起身。一位老者要靠人搀扶才能站起，另一个穿着血衣的女孩则维持跪姿，怔怔地望着亚历斯·奥克赫特爵士。他身穿御林铁卫的白袍白甲，站在王座下方，随时准备誓死保卫国王……或者，奈德猜测，保卫国王的首相。
“Joss,” Ser Raymun Darry said to a plump balding man in a brewer’s apron. “Tell the Hand what happened at Sherrer.”
“乔斯，”雷蒙·戴瑞爵士对一位穿着酿酒师傅围裙的光头胖子说，“快跟首相大人说榭尔发生了什么事。”
Joss nodded. “If it please His Grace—”
乔斯点点头。“启禀国王陛下——”
“His Grace is hunting across the Blackwater,” Ned said, wondering how a man could live his whole life a few days ride from the Red Keep and still have no notion what his king looked like. Ned was clad in a white linen doublet with the direwolf of Stark on the breast; his black wool cloak was fastened at the collar by his silver hand of office. Black and white and grey, all the shades of truth. “I am Lord Eddard Stark, the King’s Hand. Tell me who you are and what you know of these raiders.”
“国王陛下他正在黑水湾对岸打猎，”奈德一边说，一边自忖一个人有没有可能终生居住在距红堡仅几日骑程的地方，却仍旧对国王的相貌一无所知。奈德穿着白色的亚麻外衣，胸前绣有史塔克家族的冰原狼纹章，黑羊毛披风用象征职位的银手徽章别在颈边。黑白灰三色，正是真理的三种可能。“我是国王之手，即御前首相艾德·史塔克公爵。告诉我你是谁，以及你对这些强盗所知的一切。”
“I keep … I kept … I kept an alehouse, m’lord, in Sherrer, by the stone bridge. The finest ale south of the Neck, everyone said so, begging your pardons, m’lord. It’s gone now like all the rest, m’lord. They come and drank their fill and spilled the rest before they fired my roof, and they would of spilled my blood too, if they’d caught me. M’lord.”
“俺开了……以前俺开了……以前俺开了家酒馆，大人，在榭尔，就在石桥旁边。大家都说俺酿的麦酒是颈泽以南最好的，大人，请您见谅。可是大人，现在全都没了。他们进来喝饱以后又把剩下的倒掉，然后放火烧了房子，本来啊，大人，本来他们还打算要俺命，可他们没逮着。”
“They burnt us out,” a farmer beside him said. “Come riding in the dark, up from the south, and fired the fields and the houses alike, killing them as tried to stop them. They weren’t no raiders, though, m’lord. They had no mind to steal our stock, not these, they butchered my milk cow where she stood and left her for the flies and the crows.”
“他们放火把咱逼走，”他旁边的一个农夫说，“大半夜里从南方来，把田啊房子啊通通给烧了，谁要是敢上前阻拦就没命。可是大人，他们不是强盗，因为他们根本不是来抢东西，他们把我的乳牛宰了之后，把尸体丢在那儿喂苍蝇和乌鸦。”
“They rode down my ’prentice boy,” said a squat man with a smith’s muscles and a bandage around his head. He had put on his finest clothes to come to court, but his breeches were patched, his cloak travel-stained and dusty. “Chased him back and forth across the fields on their horses, poking at him with their lances like it was a game, them laughing and the boy stumbling and screaming till the big one pierced him clean through.”
“他们还把我徒弟活活踩死，”一个有着铁匠的肌肉，头上包了绷带的矮胖男子说。看得出他特别换上最好的衣服上朝，但那条裤子却布满补丁，斗篷也是风尘仆仆。“他们骑在马上哈哈大笑，追着他跑来跑去，还拿枪戳他，当成是在玩游戏。那孩子就这样跑啊，惨叫个不停，最后摔倒在地，被块头最大那家伙一枪刺死。”
The girl on her knees craned her head up at Ned, high above her on the throne. “They killed my mother too, Your Grace. And they … they …” Her voice trailed off, as if she had forgotten what she was about to say. She began to sob.
跪在地上的女孩伸长脖子抬头看着高高在上的奈德。“陛下，他们还杀了我娘。然后他们……他们……”她的话音渐弱，仿佛忘了原本要说些什么，自顾自地啼哭了起来。
Ser Raymun Darry took up the tale. “At Wendish Town, the people sought shelter in their holdfast, but the walls were timbered. The raiders piled straw against the wood and burnt them all alive. When the Wendish folk opened their gates to flee the fire, they shot them down with arrows as they came running out, even women with suckling babes.”
雷蒙·戴瑞爵士接过话茬：“温德镇的居民躲进庄园，可房子乃是木制，入侵者便将其铺上稻草，把他们活活烧死在里面。有些人开门冲出火场逃走，他们便用弓箭射杀，连怀抱奶娃的女人也不放过。”
“Oh, dreadful,” murmured Varys. “How cruel can men be?”
“哎哟，真是可怕，”瓦里斯喃喃道，“怎么会有人如此残忍呢？”
“They would of done the same for us, but the Sherrer holdfast’s made of stone,” Joss said. “Some wanted to smoke us out, but the big one said there was riper fruit up river, and they made for the Mummer’s Ford.”
“他们本来也要这么对付俺们，幸好榭尔的庄园是石头做的，”乔斯道，“有人想用烟把俺们薰出来，可那大块头说河上游比较有收获，就奔戏子滩去了。”
Ned could feel cold steel against his fingers as he leaned forward. Between each finger was a blade, the points of twisted swords fanning out like talons from arms of the throne. Even after three centuries, some were still sharp enough to cut. The Iron Throne was full of traps for the unwary. The songs said it had taken a thousand blades to make it, heated white-hot in the furnace breath of Balerion the Black Dread. The hammering had taken fifty-nine days. The end of it was this hunched black beast made of razor edges and barbs and ribbons of sharp metal; a chair that could kill a man, and had, if the stories could be believed.
奈德身体前倾，手指触碰到冰冷的金属。他每根指头间都是一柄刀刃，尖端是弯曲的利剑，有如爪子般从王座的扶手向外伸展。虽然历经了三个世纪，其中有些刃叶依旧锋利逼人。对粗心大意的人来说，铁王座称得上机关密布。歌谣里唱着当初花了一千把剑，经过黑死神贝勒里恩的烈焰加热熔解，方才铸成王座。敲敲打打前后总共花了五十九天，最后的成品就是如今这座边缘如剃刀般锋利，无处不是倒钩和纠结的驼背黑怪物。这张椅子可以杀人，倘若传说属实，还真的杀过。
What Eddard Stark was doing sitting there he would never comprehend, yet there he sat, and these people looked to him for justice. “What proof do you have that these were Lannisters?” he asked, trying to keep his fury under control. “Did they wear crimson cloaks or fly a lion banner?”
艾德·史塔克并不想坐上来，但如今他高踞于此，而下面的人民前来请求他主持正义。“你们有何证据指明这些是兰尼斯特家族的人？”他问，同时努力压抑怒气。“他们穿了红披风或打着狮子旗吗？”
“Even Lannisters are not so blind stupid as that,” Ser Marq Piper snapped. He was a swaggering bantam rooster of a youth, too young and too hot-blooded for Ned’s taste, though a fast friend of Catelyn’s brother, Edmure Tully.
“即便兰尼斯特的人，也不至于蠢到这种地步。”马柯·派柏爵士斥道。他是个脾气暴躁、有如好斗雄鸡的年轻人。虽然在奈德看来，他历练太浅，又太过血气方刚，但他却是凯特琳的弟弟艾德慕·徒利的好友。
“Every man among them was mounted and mailed, my lord,” Ser Karyl answered calmly. “They were armed with steel-tipped lances and longswords, with battle-axes for the butchering.” He gestured toward one of the ragged survivors. “You. Yes, you, no one’s going to hurt you. Tell the Hand what you told me.”
“大人，他们个个骑着骏马身披铠甲，”卡列尔爵士冷静地回答，“手中持有精钢长枪和宝剑，还有用来屠杀村民的战斧。”他伸手指指这群衣衫褴褛的幸存者中的一人。“你，对，就是你，说出来没关系，把你跟我说的话都告诉首相大人。”
The old man bobbed his head. “Concerning their horses,” he said, “it were warhorses they rode. Many a year I worked in old Ser Willum’s stables, so I knows the difference. Not a one of these ever pulled a plow, gods bear witness if I’m wrong.”
老人低下头。“关于他们骑的马，”他说，“他们骑的是战马。我在维伦老爵士的马房里做过很多年，看得出其中差异。他们骑的马没有一匹是犁过田的，我敢以天上诸神之名发誓。”
“Well-mounted brigands,” observed Littlefinger. “Perhaps they stole the horses from the last place they raided.”
“骑好马的土匪，”小指头表示意见，“或许马是他们刚从别处抢来的。”
“How many men were there in this raiding party?” Ned asked.
“这群强盗一共有多少人？”奈德问。
“A hundred, at the least,” Joss answered, in the same instant as the bandaged smith said, “Fifty,” and the grandmother behind him, “Hunnerds and hunnerds, m’lord, an army they was.”
“最起码一百个。”乔斯回答，而在同时，那位包着绷带的铁匠也开了口，“五十个。”他后面的老太婆则说，“好几百人啊，大人，根本就是一支军队。”
“You are more right than you know, goodwoman,” Lord Eddard told her. “You say they flew no banners. What of the armor they wore? Did any of you note ornaments or decorations, devices on shield or helm?”
“好太太，我相信您说得很正确。”艾德公爵告诉她，“你们说他们没打旗帜，那他们穿的盔甲呢？你们有没有谁注意到上面的花纹或装饰，或者是盾牌和头盔上的家徽？”
The brewer, Joss, shook his head. “It grieves me, m’lord, but no, the armor they showed us was plain, only … the one who led them, he was armored like the rest, but there was no mistaking him all the same. It was the size of him, m’lord. Those as say the giants are all dead never saw this one, I swear. Big as an ox he was, and a voice like stone breaking.”
酿酒师傅乔斯摇摇头。“大人，有的话那敢情好，可他们穿的盔甲样式都很普通，只有……只有那领头的，他虽然穿得和其他人一样，可您绝不会把他和别人弄混。大人，这家伙块头可真大，俺敢打赌，那些断言巨人已死的人没见过这家伙。他块头大得跟头牛似的，讲起话来声音响得像山石迸裂。”
“The Mountain!” Ser Marq said loudly. “Can any man doubt it? This was Gregor Clegane’s work.”
“一定是‘魔山’！”马柯爵士大声说，“这还用问？一定是格雷果·克里冈干的好事。”
Ned heard muttering from beneath the windows and the far end of the hall. Even in the galley, nervous whispers were exchanged. High lords and smallfolk alike knew what it could mean if Ser Marq was proved right. Ser Gregor Clegane stood bannerman to Lord Tywin Lannister.
奈德听见窗户下方和大厅远端窃窃私语声此起彼落，不安的说话声也从外面的走廊传来。在场众人不论贫富贵贱，都清楚倘若马柯爵士所言得到证实，代表着什么：格雷果·克里冈爵士正是泰温·兰尼斯特公爵的封臣。
He studied the frightened faces of the villagers. Small wonder they had been so fearful; they had thought they were being dragged here to name Lord Tywin a red-handed butcher before a king who was his son by marriage. He wondered if the knights had given them a choice.
他审视着村民惊恐的脸孔，也难怪他们如此害怕，他们起初必定以为自己被拖来这里，要在国王面前指控泰温大人为满手血腥的屠夫——而国王本人正是泰温的女婿。他很怀疑那几位骑士有没有给他们选择的余地。
Grand Maester Pycelle rose ponderously from the council table, his chain of office clinking. “Ser Marq, with respect, you cannot know that this outlaw was Ser Gregor. There are many large men in the realm.”
派席尔大学士从议事桌边沉重地站起身，象征职位的项链不住碰撞。“马柯爵士，没有对您不敬的意思，但我们无法就此认定那强盗便是格雷果爵士。国内的大块头大有人在。”
“As large as the Mountain That Rides?” Ser Karyl said. “I have never met one.”
“但有人跟魔山一样吗？”卡列尔爵士道，“我可从没见过。”
“Nor has any man here,” Ser Raymun added hotly. “Even his brother is a pup beside him. My lords, open your eyes. Do you need to see his seal on the corpses? It was Gregor.”
“相信在场也没人见过。”雷蒙爵士愤怒地说，“跟他站在一起，连他弟弟都像只小狗。在座诸君，请睁开您们的眼睛吧，难道你们还需要亲眼见到他的印章盖上尸体才肯相信吗？这一定是格雷果，不会错的。”
“Why should Ser Gregor turn brigand?” Pycelle asked. “By the grace of his liege lord, he holds a stout keep and lands of his own. The man is an anointed knight.”
“然则格雷果爵士何必去打家劫舍？”派席尔问，“靠着他的封君老爷，他不但坐拥坚固堡垒，还有自己的良田领地，此人可是个涂抹圣油，经过正式册封的骑士啊。”
“A false knight!” Ser Marq said. “Lord Tywin’s mad dog.”
“这家伙是个虚伪的骑士！”马柯爵士道，“他是泰温大人的疯狗。”
“My lord Hand,” Pycelle declared in a stiff voice, “I urge you to remind this good knight that Lord Tywin Lannister is the father of our own gracious queen.”
“首相大人，”派席尔语气僵硬地说，“还请您提醒这位‘正直’的骑士先生，泰温·兰尼斯特大人是我们王后陛下的父亲。”
“Thank you, Grand Maester Pycelle,” Ned said. “I fear we might have forgotten that if you had not pointed it out.”
“谢谢您，派席尔大学士，”奈德道，“您若不提起，只怕我们都忘了。”
From his vantage point atop the throne, he could see men slipping out the door at the far end of the hall. Hares going to ground, he supposed … or rats off to nibble the queen’s cheese. He caught a glimpse of Septa Mordane in the gallery, with his daughter Sansa beside her. Ned felt a flash of anger; this was no place for a girl. But the septa could not have known that today’s court would be anything but the usual tedious business of hearing petitions, settling disputes between rival holdfasts, and adjudicating the placement of boundary stones.
从高高的王座上，他看到大厅尽头有人溜出去。兔子就这么跑走了，他心想……不，应该说是贪恋王后奶酪的耗子吧。他瞥见茉丹修女带着珊莎站在走廊上，顿时火冒三丈：这不是小女孩该来的地方。但修女事先也不可能料想到今天的会议内容并非繁冗的日常杂务——聆听百姓请愿，调解村镇间纷争，以及判定土地界石划分等等。
At the council table below, Petyr Baelish lost interest in his quill and leaned forward. “Ser Marq, Ser Karyl, Ser Raymun—perhaps I might ask you a question? These holdfasts were under your protection. Where were you when all this slaughtering and burning was going on?”
下方的议事桌边，培提尔·贝里席终于玩腻了他的羽毛笔，倾身向前道：“马柯爵士，卡列尔爵士，雷蒙爵士——可否容我问个问题？这几个村子都是由你们所管辖与保护，请问屠杀发生当时诸位又在何地呢？”
Ser Karyl Vance answered. “I was attending my lord father in the pass below the Golden Tooth, as was Ser Marq. When the word of these outrages reached Ser Edmure Tully, he sent word that we should take a small force of men to find what survivors we could and bring them to the king.”
卡列尔·凡斯爵士回答：“当时我与家父都在金牙城下的山口，马柯爵士也是。当这些暴行传到艾德慕·徒利耳中时，他嘱咐我们率领小队人马，前来搜索幸存者，然后带他们觐见国王。”
Ser Raymun Darry spoke up. “Ser Edmure had summoned me to Riverrun with all my strength. I was camped across the river from his walls, awaiting his commands, when the word reached me. By the time I could return to my own lands, Clegane and his vermin were back across the Red Fork, riding for Lannister’s hills.”
雷蒙·戴瑞爵士发言道：“艾德慕爵士早已让我率领我的兵力赶到奔流城。我接获消息时，正在城外隔河扎营，等候进一步命令。等我赶回封地，克里冈和他的走狗已经渡过红叉河，回兰尼斯特家的丘陵地去了。”
Littlefinger stroked the point of his beard thoughtfully. “And if they come again, ser?”
小指头若有所思地抚弄他的尖胡子。“爵士先生，倘若他们再度来袭呢？”
“If they come again, we’ll use their blood to water the fields they burnt,” Ser Marq Piper declared hotly.
“他们要是有胆再来，我们就用他们的血，浇灌被他们烧掉的田地。”马柯·派柏爵士愤怒地说。
“Ser Edmure has sent men to every village and holdfast within a day’s ride of the border,” Ser Karyl explained. “The next raider will not have such an easy time of it.”
“艾德慕爵士已派兵驻防距离边境一日骑程内所有村镇与庄园。”卡列尔爵士解释，“若还有人来犯，可不会像这次那么好过了。”
And that may be precisely what Lord Tywin wants , Ned thought to himself, to bleed off strength from Riverrun, goad the boy into scattering his swords . His wife’s brother was young, and more gallant than wise. He would try to hold every inch of his soil, to defend every man, woman, and child who named him lord, and Tywin Lannister was shrewd enough to know that.
这很可能正是泰温公爵的目的，奈德心里明白，借此压榨奔流城的力量，诱使那小伙子分散兵力。他小舅子年纪尚轻，英勇有余，睿智却不足。他会竭尽全力守住每一寸土地，保护每一个依附他名下的男女老少。精明老练如泰温·兰尼斯特，自当很清楚这点。
“If your fields and holdfasts are safe from harm,” Lord Petyr was saying, “what then do you ask of the throne?”
“既然你们的田产和房舍都安全了，”培提尔伯爵道，“那还上朝来做什么？”
“The lords of the Trident keep the king’s peace,” Ser Raymun Darry said. “The Lannisters have broken it. We ask leave to answer them, steel for steel. We ask justice for the smallfolk of Sherrer and Wendish Town and the Mummer’s Ford.”
“三河流域的领主以国王之名维持境内和平，”雷蒙·戴瑞说，“兰尼斯特的人破坏了和平。我们要求血债血偿，我们要为榭尔村、温德镇和戏子滩的百姓讨个公道。”
“Edmure agrees, we must pay Gregor Clegane back his bloody coin,” Ser Marq declared, “but old Lord Hoster commanded us to come here and beg the king’s leave before we strike.”
“艾德慕同意我们以牙还牙，用相同的手段对付格雷果·克里冈，”马柯爵士宣布，“但霍斯特老爵爷命令我们首先得到国王的允许再出击。”
Thank the gods for old Lord Hoster, then . Tywin Lannister was as much fox as lion. If indeed he’d sent Ser Gregor to burn and pillage—and Ned did not doubt that he had—he’d taken care to see that he rode under cover of night, without banners, in the guise of a common brigand. Should Riverrun strike back, Cersei and her father would insist that it had been the Tullys who broke the king’s peace, not the Lannisters. The gods only knew what Robert would believe.
感谢天上诸神，还好有霍斯特大人在。与其说泰温·兰尼斯特是头狮子，不如说他是只狐狸。假如当真是他派格雷果爵士去杀人放火——奈德对此毫无疑问——他一定会特意嘱咐格雷果小心翼翼，夜晚行动，不张旗帜，扮成普通强盗。倘若奔流城反击，瑟曦和她父亲便能坚称破坏和平的是徒利家族，而非兰尼斯特。到时候劳勃会相信哪一边，只有诸神才知道。
Grand Maester Pycelle was on his feet again. “My lord Hand, if these good folk believe that Ser Gregor has forsaken his holy vows for plunder and rape, let them go to his liege lord and make their complaint. These crimes are no concern of the throne. Let them seek Lord Tywin’s justice.”
派席尔大学士又站起来。“首相大人。如果这几位好村民坚信格雷果爵士背弃了他神圣的誓言，转而奸淫掳掠，请让他们去见他的封君大人，向他去抱怨。这些罪行与王室无关，他们应当请求泰温大人主持正义。”
“It is all the king’s justice,” Ned told him. “North, south, east, or west, all we do we do in Robert’s name.”
“这些当然与国王有关，”奈德告诉他，“不论东西南北，我们均以劳勃之名行事。”
“The king’s justice,” Grand Maester Pycelle said. “So it is, and so we should defer this matter until the king—”
“和国王有关，”派席尔大学士说，“此话有理，那么我们该等国王回来再行商——”
“The king is hunting across the river and may not return for days,” Lord Eddard said. “Robert bid me to sit here in his place, to listen with his ears, and to speak with his voice. I mean to do just that … though I agree that he must be told.” He saw a familiar face beneath the tapestries. “Ser Robar.”
“国王此刻正在河对岸打猎，可能好几天都不会回来。”艾德公爵说，“劳勃要我暂代他处理国事，用他的耳朵倾听，用他的声音说话，而我将谨遵其意……但我同意应该要知会他。”他在壁毡下看到一张熟悉的脸孔。“罗拔爵士。”
Ser Robar Royce stepped forward and bowed. “My lord.”
罗拔·罗伊斯爵士前跨一步，鞠躬道：“大人，您有何吩咐？”
“Your father is hunting with the king,” Ned said. “Will you bring them word of what was said and done here today?”
“令尊与国王陛下一道外出狩猎，”奈德说，“可否请你将今日之事通报他们？”
“At once, my lord.”
“大人，我这就去办。”
“Do we have your leave to take our vengeance against Ser Gregor, then?” Marq Piper asked the throne.
“那我们是不是这就可找格雷果爵士报一箭之仇？”马柯·派柏询问摄政。
“Vengeance?” Ned said. “I thought we were speaking of justice. Burning Clegane’s fields and slaughtering his people will not restore the king’s peace, only your injured pride.” He glanced away before the young knight could voice his outraged protest, and addressed the villagers. “People of Sherrer, I cannot give you back your homes or your crops, nor can I restore your dead to life. But perhaps I can give you some small measure of justice, in the name of our king, Robert.”
“报仇？”奈德说，“我以为我们谈的是主持正义。到克里冈的封地放火杀人并不会恢复王国境内的和平，只能稍稍弥补你受损的自尊。”愤怒的年轻骑士还来不及反驳，他便转开视线，对那群村民说，“榭尔的居民们，我无法归还你们的家园和你们的作物，更不能将死者复生。但或许我能以我们的国王劳勃之名，还你们一个迟来的公道。”
Every eye in the hall was fixed on him, waiting. Slowly Ned struggled to his feet, pushing himself up from the throne with the strength of his arms, his shattered leg screaming inside its cast. He did his best to ignore the pain; it was no moment to let them see his weakness. “The First Men believed that the judge who called for death should wield the sword, and in the north we hold to that still. I mislike sending another to do my killing … yet it seems I have no choice.” He gestured at his broken leg.
大厅里的每一只眼睛都注视着他，凝神等待。奈德缓缓地挣扎着站起来，两手全力撑住王座，断腿撕心裂肺地剧痛。他尽一切所能不去注意疼痛，此刻千万不能在他们面前显示虚弱。“先民认为判人死刑者应该亲自操刀，我们在北境依旧保留了这个传统。我本不愿由他人代为执行……但看来我别无选择。”他指指自己的断腿。
“Lord Eddard!” The shout came from the west side of the hall as a handsome stripling of a boy strode forth boldly. Out of his armor, Ser Loras Tyrell looked even younger than his sixteen years. He wore pale blue silk, his belt a linked chain of golden roses, the sigil of his House. “I beg you the honor of acting in your place. Give this task to me, my lord, and I swear I shall not fail you.”
“艾德大人！”从大厅西侧传来一声喊叫，一名俊美的年轻男孩勇敢地向前走来。年仅十六的洛拉斯·提利尔爵士，脱去铠甲后愈发显得年轻。他身穿浅蓝色丝衣，系着朵朵金玫瑰连缀而成的腰带。金玫瑰是他家族的纹章。“我恳求您让我有幸代您出战。把这个任务交给我吧，大人，我发誓不会教您失望。”
Littlefinger chuckled. “Ser Loras, if we send you off alone, Ser Gregor will send us back your head with a plum stuffed in that pretty mouth of yours. The Mountain is not the sort to bend his neck to any man’s justice.”
小指头轻笑。“洛拉斯爵士，如果我们单只派您去对付格雷果爵士，他八成会把您的头送回来，顺便塞颗李子在您那张漂亮的嘴里。魔山可不会乖乖地看在正义的份上束手就擒。”
“I do not fear Gregor Clegane,” Ser Loras said haughtily.
“我不怕格雷果·克里冈。”洛拉斯爵士骄傲地说。
Ned eased himself slowly back onto the hard iron seat of Aegon’s misshapen throne. His eyes searched the faces along the wall. “Lord Beric,” he called out. “Thoros of Myr. Ser Gladden. Lord Lothar.” The men named stepped forward one by one. “Each of you is to assemble twenty men, to bring my word to Gregor’s keep. Twenty of my own guards shall go with you. Lord Beric Dondarrion, you shall have the command, as befits your rank.”
奈德缓缓坐回伊耿那张畸形王座的冷硬铁板上，他的视线沿着墙壁一张接一张脸孔地搜索。“贝里大人，”他喊，“密尔的索罗斯，葛拉登爵士，罗沙大人。”被点到名字的人纷纷站到前面。“请你们各带二十名士兵，将我的命令送到格雷果的城堡。我将派出自己的二十名侍卫与你们同行。贝里·唐德利恩大人，此次任务由您指挥，因为您的爵禄最高。”
The young lord with the red-gold hair bowed. “As you command, Lord Eddard.”
金红头发的年轻伯爵鞠躬道：“艾德大人，悉听尊命。”
Ned raised his voice, so it carried to the far end of the throne room. “In the name of Robert of the House Baratheon, the First of his Name, King of the Andals and the Rhoynar and the First Men, Lord of the Seven Kingdoms and Protector of the Realm, by the word of Eddard of the House Stark, his Hand, I charge you to ride to the westlands with all haste, to cross the Red Fork of the Trident under the king’s flag, and there bring the king’s justice to the false knight Gregor Clegane, and to all those who shared in his crimes. I denounce him, and attaint him, and strip him of all rank and titles, of all lands and incomes and holdings, and do sentence him to death. May the gods take pity on his soul.”
奈德提高音量，让王座大厅里所有的人都能听见。“以安达尔人、洛伊拿人和先民的国王，七国的统治者暨全境守护者，拜拉席恩家族的劳勃一世之名，我，史塔克家族的艾德公爵，身为其国王之手，在此命令你们即刻高举国王的旗帜，全速渡过三叉戟河的红叉支流，进入西境，依照国王律法，制裁虚伪的骑士格雷果·克里冈，以及所有与他合谋的共犯。我在此宣告，从今以后，褫夺其一切官阶与职衔，收回其一切封地、赋税和房产，并明令处之以死刑。愿天上诸神怜悯他的灵魂。”
When the echo of his words had died away, the Knight of Flowers seemed perplexed. “Lord Eddard, what of me?”
余音渐落之后，百花骑士神情困惑地问：“艾德大人，那我该做什么？”
Ned looked down on him. From on high, Loras Tyrell seemed almost as young as Robb. “No one doubts your valor, Ser Loras, but we are about justice here, and what you seek is vengeance.” He looked back to Lord Beric. “Ride at first light. These things are best done quickly.” He held up a hand. “The throne will hear no more petitions today.”
奈德低头看着他。居高临下，洛拉斯·提利尔看起来就和罗柏一样年轻。“洛拉斯爵士，没有人怀疑您的勇武，然而我们今天谈的是律法和正义，你要的却是报仇雪恨。”他转向贝里伯爵说，“明天天亮就出发，这事最好尽快处理。”语毕他举起手。“今天的请愿到此为止。”
Alyn and Porther climbed the steep iron steps to help him back down. As they made their descent, he could feel Loras Tyrell’s sullen stare, but the boy had stalked away before Ned reached the floor of the throne room.
埃林和波瑟爬上陡峻狭窄的铁台阶，搀扶他下去。步下阶梯时，奈德感觉得出洛拉斯·提利尔愠怒的瞪视，然而等他回到地面，那男孩已经走了。
At the base of the Iron Throne, Varys was gathering papers from the council table. Littlefinger and Grand Maester Pycelle had already taken their leave. “You are a bolder man than I, my lord,” the eunuch said softly.
铁王座下方，瓦里斯正忙着收拾议事桌上散乱的文件。小指头和派席尔国师已先行离去。“大人，您的胆子可比我大多了。”太监轻声说。
“How so, Lord Varys?” Ned asked brusquely. His leg was throbbing, and he was in no mood for word games.
“瓦里斯大人，此话怎讲？”奈德唐突地问。他的断腿隐隐抽痛，此刻他没有心情玩文字游戏。
“Had it been me up there, I should have sent Ser Loras. He so wanted to go … and a man who has the Lannisters for his enemies would do well to make the Tyrells his friends.”
“换做是我坐上面，我大概会派洛拉斯爵士去。瞧他那副跃跃欲试的模样……再说要与兰尼斯特为敌，还有什么能比拉拢提利尔家族更要紧呢？”
“Ser Loras is young,” said Ned. “I daresay he will outgrow the disappointment.”
“洛拉斯爵士还年轻，”奈德道，“我敢说他很快就会忘记这次失意。”
“And Ser Ilyn?” The eunuch stroked a plump, powdered cheek. “He is the King’s Justice, after all. Sending other men to do his office … some might construe that as a grave insult.”
“那伊林爵士呢？”太监轻抚他搽过粉的肥胖脸颊。“再怎么说，他到底是国王的执法官哪，叫别人去做他份内之事……可能会被解读成恶意侮辱哟。”
“No slight was intended.” In truth, Ned did not trust the mute knight, though perhaps that was only because he misliked executioners. “I remind you, the Paynes are bannermen to House Lannister. I thought it best to choose men who owed Lord Tywin no fealty.”
“我并无冒犯之意。”老实说，奈德并不信任那位哑巴骑士，但归根到底，或许只是肇因于他对刽子手的嫌恶罢。“容我提醒您，派恩家族世代是兰尼斯特臣属。我认为选择并未对泰温大人宣誓效忠的人前去比较妥当。”
“Very prudent, no doubt,” Varys said. “Still, I chanced to see Ser Ilyn in the back of the hall, staring at us with those pale eyes of his, and I must say, he did not look pleased, though to be sure it is hard to tell with our silent knight. I hope he outgrows his disappointment as well. He does so love his work …”
“您的作法毫无疑问非常谨慎，”瓦里斯道，“只是我碰巧看见伊林爵士站在大厅后面，张大那双苍白的眼睛瞪着我们，我必须承认，他看起来委实不怎么高兴，虽然我们这位沉默寡言的骑士先生心里究竟在想些什么，原本就不易猜测。我也希望他很快就会忘记这次失意。他可是热爱着他的工作啊……”
