*TYRION
丹妮在帐篷里找到一个装满羽毛的柔软丝枕，将枕头紧抱在前胸，走回到她的日和星卓戈身边。如果我回头，一切就都完了。她走起路来觉得好痛苦，心中只想就此长眠，并不再做梦。
“T hey have my son,” Tywin Lannister said.
她在卓戈身边跪下，吻了他的双唇，然后用枕头盖住他的脸。
“They do, my lord.” The messenger’s voice was dulled by exhaustion. On the breast of his torn surcoat, the brindled boar of Crakehall was half-obscured by dried blood.
第七十章 提利昂
One of your sons, Tyrion thought. He took a sip of wine and said not a word, thinking of Jaime. When he lifted his arm, pain shot through his elbow, reminding him of his own brief taste of battle. He loved his brother, but he would not have wanted to be with him in the Whispering Wood for all the gold in Casterly Rock.
“我儿子在他们手上。”泰温·兰尼斯特说。
His lord father’s assembled captains and bannermen had fallen very quiet as the courier told his tale. The only sound was the crackle and hiss of the log burning in the hearth at the end of the long, drafty common room.
“是的，大人。”信使的声音因疲累而呆滞。在他破碎的无袖罩袍前胸部，干涸的血渍遮住了克雷赫家族的斑纹野猪。
After the hardships of the long relentless drive south, the prospect of even a single night in an inn had cheered Tyrion mightily … though he rather wished it had not been this inn again, with all its memories. His father had set a grueling pace, and it had taken its toll. Men wounded in the battle kept up as best they could or were abandoned to fend for themselves. Every morning they left a few more by the roadside, men who went to sleep never to wake. Every afternoon a few more collapsed along the way. And every evening a few more deserted, stealing off into the dusk. Tyrion had been half-tempted to go with them.
你两个儿子中的一个，提利昂心想。他啜了口酒，一言不发，心里想着詹姆。抬手之时，剧痛从肘部直冲脑际，提醒着他战场的滋味。他虽然爱哥哥，但就算给他全凯岩城的金子，他也不想和哥哥待在呓语森林。
He had been upstairs, enjoying the comfort of a featherbed and the warmth of Shae’s body beside him, when his squire had woken him to say that a rider had arrived with dire news of Riverrun. So it had all been for nothing. The rush south, the endless forced marches, the bodies left beside the road … all for naught. Robb Stark had reached Riverrun days and days ago.
父亲召集的诸侯和将领纷纷安静下来，听信使陈述事情经过。宽敞通风的旅馆长厅里，只有火炉中的柴薪在劈啪作晌。
“How could this happen?” Ser Harys Swyft moaned. “How? Even after the Whispering Wood, you had Riverrun ringed in iron, surrounded by a great host … what madness made Ser Jaime decide to split his men into three separate camps? Surely he knew how vulnerable that would leave them?”
经历了长途的急行南下，想到可以在旅店稍作歇息，虽然只有一晚，依旧使提利昂大为振奋……只是他暗暗希望别要又是这家充满回忆的旅店。父亲严令他们以耗尽体力的速度行进，结果损失惨重。战争中的伤员如果不能跟上，就落得被抛下来自生自灭的下场。每天早上他们动身之时，总有些人倒在路边，睡着便再没醒来；下午，又有另一些人筋疲力竭地瘫在道旁；到得晚上，更有些人当了逃兵，遁进夜色之中，连提利昂本人都很想跟他们一起走。
Better than you, you chinless craven , Tyrion thought. Jaime might have lost Riverrun, but it angered him to hear his brother slandered by the likes of Swyft, a shameless lickspittle whose greatest accomplishment was marrying his equally chinless daughter to Ser Kevan, and thereby attaching himself to the Lannisters.
片刻前，他人还在楼上，躺在柔软舒适的羽毛床上，怀抱雪伊温暖的身体。然而他的侍从匆匆跑来把他摇醒，报告说有人骑马带来奔流城方面的重大消息。他立刻明白他们是白跑了一趟。往南急奔，无止尽的急行军和弃于路边的尸体……全成了空。罗柏·史塔克早在好几天前便解了奔流城之围。
“I would have done the same,” his uncle responded, a good deal more calmly than Tyrion might have. “You have never seen Riverrun, Ser Harys, or you would know that Jaime had little choice in the matter. The castle is situated at the end of the point of land where the Tumblestone flows into the Red Fork of the Trident. The rivers form two sides of a triangle, and when danger threatens, the Tullys open their sluice gates upstream to create a wide moat on the third side, turning Riverrun into an island. The walls rise sheer from the water, and from their towers the defenders have a commanding view of the opposite shores for many leagues around. To cut off all the approaches, a besieger must needs place one camp north of the Tumblestone, one south of the Red Fork, and a third between the rivers, west of the moat. There is no other way, none.”
“这怎么可能？”哈瑞斯·史威佛爵士呻吟道，“怎么可能？即便在呓语森林之战以后，奔流城依旧为大军团团包围……詹姆爵士到底在想什么，怎会把部队分为三处驻扎？他总该清楚这样会有何风险吧？”
“Ser Kevan speaks truly, my lords,” the courier said. “We’d built palisades of sharpened stakes around the camps, yet it was not enough, not with no warning and the rivers cutting us off from each other. They came down on the north camp first. No one was expecting an attack. Marq Piper had been raiding our supply trains, but he had no more than fifty men. Ser Jaime had gone out to deal with them the night before … well, with what we thought was them. We were told the Stark host was east of the Green Fork, marching south …”
他比你这没下巴的懦夫清楚多了，提利昂心想。纵然詹姆丢了奔流城，然而听见哥哥被史威佛这种人毁谤，依旧令他怒火中烧。史威佛是个厚颜无耻的马屁精，他这辈子最大的成就，就是把他那个同样没下巴的女儿嫁给凯冯爵士，借此与兰尼斯特家族攀上亲戚。
“And your outriders?” Ser Gregor Clegane’s face might have been hewn from rock. The fire in the hearth gave a somber orange cast to his skin and put deep shadows in the hollows of his eyes. “They saw nothing? They gave you no warning?”
“换我也会这么做，”叔叔应道，提利昂若是开口，绝不会如他这般冷静。“哈瑞斯爵士，您没见过奔流城，不然您一定会清楚詹姆别无选择。奔流城座落于腾石河汇流进三叉戟河的支流红叉河的三角洲尖端，河流构成了三角形的两边，而一旦遇到危险，徒利家便打开上游的闸门，在第三边造出宽阔的护城河，将奔流城变为河中孤岛。城墙自水中高高拔起，守军自塔楼上可以看清对岸数里格之内的所有事物。若要切断各方支援，攻城方必须在腾石河北岸、红又河南岸以及护城河西岸，亦即两条河之间，各放置一支军队。除此之外，别无他法。
The bloodstained messenger shook his head. “Our outriders had been vanishing. Marq Piper’s work, we thought. The ones who did come back had seen nothing.”
“诸位大人，凯冯爵士说得没错，”信使说，“我军已在营地周围密布削尖木栅，但在没有任何预警，河水又把我们的营地互相切断的情况下，这样的准备远远不够。他们首先袭击北方的营地，时机完全出乎我们的意料。先前，马柯·派柏不断骚扰我军的补给车队，但他手下只有五六十人。遭受攻击的前一晚，詹姆爵士亲自带兵去对付他们……唉，当时我们以为目标就是派柏那伙人。我们听说史塔克军还在绿叉河东岸，正朝南而去……”
“A man who sees nothing has no use for his eyes,” the Mountain declared. “Cut them out and give them to your next outrider. Tell him you hope that four eyes might see better than two … and if not, the man after him will have six.”
“你们的斥候呢？”格雷果·克里冈爵士的脸活像石雕，火光为他的皮肤罩上了一层阴森的橙色，在他的眼眶底投下深深的阴影。“莫非他们什么都没看到？没给你们任何警讯？”
Lord Tywin Lannister turned his face to study Ser Gregor. Tyrion saw a glimmer of gold as the light shone off his father’s pupils, but he could not have said whether the look was one of approval or disgust. Lord Tywin was oft quiet in council, preferring to listen before he spoke, a habit Tyrion himself tried to emulate. Yet this silence was uncharacteristic even for him, and his wine was untouched.
满身血污的信使摇摇头。“我们的侦察部队最近不断失踪，我们以为是马柯·派柏搞的鬼。而偶尔回来的人又说什么也没发现。”
“You said they came at night,” Ser Kevan prompted.
“什么也发现不了表示他用不着眼睛，”魔山宣布，“把他们的眼睛挖出来，交给替补的斥候，告诉他：希望四只眼睛可以比两只眼睛看得清楚……如果他还是不行，那么下一个人就会有六只眼睛了。”
The man gave a weary nod. “The Blackfish led the van, cutting down our sentries and clearing away the palisades for the main assault. By the time our men knew what was happening, riders were pouring over the ditch banks and galloping through the camp with swords and torches in hand. I was sleeping in the west camp, between the rivers. When we heard the fighting and saw the tents being fired, Lord Brax led us to the rafts and we tried to pole across, but the current pushed us downstream and the Tullys started flinging rocks at us with the catapults on their walls. I saw one raft smashed to kindling and three others overturned, men swept into the river and drowned … and those who did make it across found the Starks waiting for them on the riverbanks.”
泰温·兰尼斯特公爵转头审视格雷果爵士，提利昂看到父亲瞳中金光一闪，但他说不准那是赞许抑或嫌恶。泰温公爵在会议上通常保持缄默，宁可在发言前先倾听别人的意见，提利昂一直很想仿效他这个习惯。然而就算是父亲，如此沉默也很不寻常，他连酒都没碰。
Ser Flement Brax wore a silver-and-purple tabard and the look of a man who cannot comprehend what he has just heard. “My lord father—”
“你说他们发动夜袭？”凯冯爵士提问。
“Sorry, my lord,” the messenger said. “Lord Brax was clad in plate-and-mail when his raft overturned. He was very gallant.”
来人疲累地点点头。“前锋由黑鱼率领，砍倒我们的卫兵，清除栅栏，以利主力攻击。等我们的人醒悟过来，对方骑兵已经跃过沟渠，手执刀剑和火把冲进了营区。我睡在西寨，就是两条河之间的地方。我们这边的人听到打斗，看见帐篷着火，布拉克斯大人便领着大家上了木筏，想划到对岸去援救。然而水流湍急，直把我们往下游冲，徒利家的守军发现后，便用城墙上的投石机发动轰击。我亲眼看到一艘木筏被砸得稀烂，另外三艘翻倒，上面的人都被卷进河里淹死……而好不容易过河的人，却发现史塔克军正在对岸等着他们。”
He was a fool , Tyrion thought, swirling his cup and staring down into the winy depths. Crossing a river at night on a crude raft, wearing armor, with an enemy waiting on the other side—if that was gallantry, he would take cowardice every time. He wondered if Lord Brax had felt especially gallant as the weight of his steel pulled him under the black water.
佛列蒙·布拉克斯爵士穿着一件银紫相间的罩袍，脸上露出难以置信的表情。“我父亲，我父亲大人他——”
“The camp between the rivers was overrun as well,” the messenger was saying. “While we were trying to cross, more Starks swept in from the west, two columns of armored horse. I saw Lord Umber’s giant-in-chains and the Mallister eagle, but it was the boy who led them, with a monstrous wolf running at his side. I wasn’t there to see, but it’s said the beast killed four men and ripped apart a dozen horses. Our spearmen formed up a shieldwall and held against their first charge, but when the Tullys saw them engaged, they opened the gates of Riverrun and Tytos Blackwood led a sortie across the drawbridge and took them in the rear.”
“大人，我很遗憾。”信使说，“布拉克斯大人的筏子翻船时，他穿戴着全身铠和锁甲。他是个勇士。”
“Gods save us,” Lord Lefford swore.
他是个蠢蛋，提利昂心想，一边摇晃酒杯，朝杯中的漩涡望去。大半夜的，全副武装，乘着简陋的木筏穿过急流，朝对岸严阵以待的敌人扑去——假如这叫做勇士，他宁可每次都当懦夫。不知布拉克斯伯爵被沉重的盔甲拖进漆黑的深水时，有没有觉得特别英勇啊？
“Greatjon Umber fired the siege towers we were building, and Lord Blackwood found Ser Edmure Tully in chains among the other captives, and made off with them all. Our south camp was under the command of Ser Forley Prester. He retreated in good order when he saw that the other camps were lost, with two thousand spears and as many bowmen, but the Tyroshi sellsword who led his freeriders struck his banners and went over to the foe.”
“随后，两河之间的营地也被敌人攻陷，”信使续道，“我们忙着渡河时，史塔克军的重骑兵排成两个纵队，从西边杀出。我看到安柏伯爵的碎链巨人旗和梅利斯特家族的老鹰纹章，但最可怕的却是那个带头的小鬼，他身边跟了一头怪物似的狼。我没和他们交手，听说那只怪物杀了四个活人，咬死十几匹马。后来我军的长枪兵组成盾墙，挡住他们的第一次冲锋，谁料徒利家一看咱们无暇他顾，便打开奔流城门，由泰陀斯·布莱伍德率军渡过吊桥出击，偷袭我军后方。”
“Curse the man.” His uncle Kevan sounded more angry than surprised. “I warned Jaime not to trust that one. A man who fights for coin is loyal only to his purse.”
“诸神保佑。”莱佛德伯爵咒道。
Lord Tywin wove his fingers together under his chin. Only his eyes moved as he listened. His bristling golden sidewhiskers framed a face so still it might have been a mask, but Tyrion could see tiny beads of sweat dappling his father’s shaven head.
“大琼恩·安柏放火烧了我们辛苦建造的攻城塔，布莱伍德大人则找到了被我们锁起来的艾德慕·徒利爵士以及其他战俘，并将他们通通救走。南寨由佛勒·普莱斯特爵士指挥，眼见相邻的阵地纷纷失守，他便率领手下两千枪兵和两千弓箭手井井有条地向西撤退了，但那掌管自由骑手的泰洛西佣兵却砍断旗帜，投靠了敌方。”
“How could it happen?” Ser Harys Swyft wailed again. “Ser Jaime taken, the siege broken … this is a catastrophe!”
“该死的家伙，”凯冯叔叔的口气不仅惊讶，更加愤怒。“我早警告过詹姆别相信这混蛋，为钱而战的人只会为自己的腰包卖命。”
Ser Addam Marbrand said, “I am sure we are all grateful to you for pointing out the obvious, Ser Harys. The question is, what shall we do about it?”
泰温公爵十指交叉，顶着下巴，倾听时只有眼睛在动。他两颊的金黄短须围出一张纹丝不动的脸，活像一张面具。然而，提利昂注意到父亲的光头上密布细小汗珠。
“What can we do? Jaime’s host is all slaughtered or taken or put to flight, and the Starks and the Tullys sit squarely across our line of supply. We are cut off from the west! They can march on Casterly Rock if they so choose, and what’s to stop them? My lords, we are beaten. We must sue for peace.”
“这怎么可能？”哈瑞斯·史威佛爵士再度哀嚎。“詹姆爵士被俘，围城军队又遭击溃……简直是大难临头！”
“Peace?” Tyrion swirled his wine thoughtfully, took a deep draft, and hurled his empty cup to the floor, where it shattered into a thousand pieces. “There’s your peace, Ser Harys. My sweet nephew broke it for good and all when he decided to ornament the Red Keep with Lord Eddard’s head. You’ll have an easier time drinking wine from that cup than you will convincing Robb Stark to make peace now . He’s winning … or hadn’t you noticed?”
亚当·马尔布兰爵士道：“哈瑞斯爵士，我们都很感激您指出显而易见的事实，但眼下的当务之急是，我们下一步该怎么走？”
“Two battles do not make a war,” Ser Addam insisted. “We are far from lost. I should welcome the chance to try my own steel against this Stark boy.”
“还能怎么样？詹姆的军队不是被杀、被俘就是逃散，而史塔克家与徒利家的部队正好扼住我们的补给线，我们与西边的联系完全被切断了！他们甚至可以大摇大摆地进军凯岩城，谁又能阻止他们呢？诸位大人，我们战败了，应该立刻求和。”
“Perhaps they would consent to a truce, and allow us to trade our prisoners for theirs,” offered Lord Lefford.
“求和？”提利昂若有所思地晃着酒杯，一饮而尽，随后将空杯往地上一掷，摔成千百碎片。“哈瑞斯爵士，这就是求和的结果。打从我那好外甥决定拿艾德大人的头来装饰红堡的那一刻起，所有和谈的机会都粉碎了。眼下要跟罗柏·史塔克求和，比用地下这破杯装酒还难。占上风的是他……难道您没发现？”
“Unless they trade three-for-one, we still come out light on those scales,” Tyrion said acidly. “And what are we to offer for my brother? Lord Eddard’s rotting head?”
“两场战役的胜负并不能决定整个战争的成败，”亚当爵士坚持，“我们还远远没有战败。我很乐意跟这史塔克小鬼在战场上亲自较量较量。”
“I had heard that Queen Cersei has the Hand’s daughters,” Lefford said hopefully. “If we give the lad his sisters back …”
“或许他们会答应暂时停战，以便双方交换人质。”莱佛德伯爵提议。
Ser Addam snorted disdainfully. “He would have to be an utter ass to trade Jaime Lannister’s life for two girls.”
“除非他们愿意三个换一个——这样我们都嫌不够咧。”提利昂尖酸地说，“再说了，我们拿谁去换我哥哥？拿艾德大人烂掉的头么？”
“Then we must ransom Ser Jaime, whatever it costs,” Lord Lefford said.
“听说瑟曦太后手上握有首相的两个女儿，”莱佛德满怀希望地说，“假如我们提出把这小子的妹妹还给他……”
Tyrion rolled his eyes. “If the Starks feel the need for gold, they can melt down Jaime’s armor.”
亚当爵士轻蔑地哼了一声。“他疯了才拿詹姆·兰尼斯特的命来换两个小女生。”
“If we ask for a truce, they will think us weak,” Ser Addam argued. “We should march on them at once.”
“那就把詹姆爵士赎回来，不管花多少金子。”莱佛德伯爵道。
“Surely our friends at court could be prevailed upon to join us with fresh troops,” said Ser Harys. “And someone might return to Casterly Rock to raise a new host.”
提利昂翻起白眼。“史塔克家要真那么缺钱，把詹姆的盔甲拿去熔掉不就得啦。”
Lord Tywin Lannister rose to his feet. “They have my son,” he said once more, in a voice that cut through the babble like a sword through suet. “Leave me. All of you.”
“我们求和，他们就会看轻我们。”亚当爵士争辩，“依我之见，我们应该立刻进兵。”
Ever the soul of obedience, Tyrion rose to depart with the rest, but his father gave him a look. “Not you, Tyrion. Remain. And you as well, Kevan. The rest of you, out.”
“嗯，想必我们宫中的朋友会乐意提供补充兵力，”哈瑞斯爵士说，“同时也应当派人回凯岩城组织新军。”
Tyrion eased himself back onto the bench, startled into speechlessness. Ser Kevan crossed the room to the wine casks. “Uncle,” Tyrion called, “if you would be so kind—”
这时，泰温·兰尼斯特公爵霍地起身。“我儿子在他们手上！”他重复了一遍，声音穿透众声喧哗，宛如利剑划破油脂。“退下，统统退下。”
“Here.” His father offered him his cup, the wine untouched.
提利昂向来习于听命，于是他立即起身，准备和其他人一起离去。但父亲看了他一眼，“不，提利昂，你留下。凯冯，你也是。其他人给我出去。”
Now Tyrion truly was nonplussed. He drank.
提利昂坐回板凳，惊讶得说不出话来。凯冯爵士穿过房间，走到酒桶边。“叔叔，”提利昂叫道，“可否麻烦您——”
Lord Tywin seated himself. “You have the right of it about Stark. Alive, we might have used Lord Eddard to forge a peace with Winterfell and Riverrun, a peace that would have given us the time we need to deal with Robert’s brothers. Dead …” His hand curled into a fist. “Madness. Rank madness.”
“拿去。”父亲把自己面前那杯一动未动的酒递给他。
“Joff’s only a boy,” Tyrion pointed out. “At his age, I committed a few follies of my own.”
这下提利昂真有些不知所措。他只有喝的份。
His father gave him a sharp look. “I suppose we ought to be grateful that he has not yet married a whore.”
泰温公爵坐下来。“关于史塔克那边，你的判断没错。假如艾德大人还活着，我们可以用他当筹码，与临冬城和奔流城达成停战，如此一来，便有时间全力对付劳勃的两个弟弟。眼下他死了……”他的手紧握成拳。“胡来，完全是胡来。”
Tyrion sipped at his wine, wondering how Lord Tywin would look if he flung the cup in his face.
“小乔只是个孩子，”提利昂解释，“我在他这年纪的时候，也干过不少蠢事。”
“Our position is worse than you know,” his father went on. “It would seem we have a new king.”
父亲目光锐利地瞪了他一眼。“是么？好在他没娶妓女为妻。”
Ser Kevan looked poleaxed. “A new—who? What have they done to Joffrey?”
提利昂啜着酒，心想他若把酒杯朝父亲的脸上泼去，泰温公爵会是什么表情。
The faintest flicker of distaste played across Lord Tywin’s thin lips. “Nothing … yet. My grandson still sits the Iron Throne, but the eunuch has heard whispers from the south. Renly Baratheon wed Margaery Tyrell at Highgarden this fortnight past, and now he has claimed the crown. The bride’s father and brothers have bent the knee and sworn him their swords.”
“目前形势比你们所知的更糟，”父亲继续道，“我们有了个新国王。”
“Those are grave tidings.” When Ser Kevan frowned, the furrows in his brow grew deep as canyons.
凯冯爵士浑身一震。“新国——是谁？他们把乔佛里怎样了？”
“My daughter commands us to ride for King’s Landing at once, to defend the Red Keep against King Renly and the Knight of Flowers.” His mouth tightened. “Commands us, mind you. In the name of the king and council.”
一抹极细微的嫌恶扫过泰温公爵的薄唇。“没怎么样……至少到目前为止，我外孙依旧坐在铁王座上，但那太监收到南方的消息。两周前，蓝礼·拜拉席恩在高庭娶了玛格丽·提利尔为妻，并登基为王，新娘的父亲和兄长都已向他下跪宣誓效忠。”
“How is King Joffrey taking the news?” Tyrion asked with a certain black amusement.
“这真是坏消息。”凯冯爵士皱眉时，额上的沟纹深如峡谷。
“Cersei has not seen fit to tell him yet,” Lord Tywin said. “She fears he might insist on marching against Renly himself.”
“我女儿命令我们立刻前往君临，协防红堡，抵御蓝礼‘国王’和百花骑士。”他嘴唇一抿。“注意，她是以国王和御前会议之名‘命令’我们。”
“With what army?” Tyrion asked. “You don’t plan to give him this one, I hope?”
“乔佛里国王对此事有何反应？”提利昂带着某种黑色的兴致发问。
“He talks of leading the City Watch,” Lord Tywin said.
“瑟曦认为现在还不宜告诉他，”泰温公爵说，“她恐怕他会坚持亲自出兵征讨蓝礼。”
“If he takes the Watch, he’ll leave the city undefended,” Ser Kevan said. “And with Lord Stannis on Dragonstone …”
“出兵？哪来的军队？”提利昂问，“你该不会打算把这支军队交给他吧？”
“Yes.” Lord Tywin looked down at his son. “I had thought you were the one made for motley, Tyrion, but it would appear that I was wrong.”
“他曾宣称要率领都城守卫队出征。”泰温公爵道。
“Why, Father,” said Tyrion, “that almost sounds like praise.” He leaned forward intently. “What of Stannis? He’s the elder, not Renly. How does he feel about his brother’s claim?”
“他带走都城守卫队，城里势必防御空虚，”凯冯爵士说，“那么龙石岛的史坦尼斯公爵……”
His father frowned. “I have felt from the beginning that Stannis was a greater danger than all the others combined. Yet he does nothing. Oh, Varys hears his whispers. Stannis is building ships, Stannis is hiring sellswords, Stannis is bringing a shadowbinder from Asshai. What does it mean? Is any of it true?” He gave an irritated shrug. “Kevan, bring us the map.”
“是的。”泰温公爵睥睨着侏儒儿子。“提利昂，我原以为你生来只有杂耍的份，不过看来我是错了。”
Ser Kevan did as he was bid. Lord Tywin unrolled the leather, smoothing it flat. “Jaime has left us in a bad way. Roose Bolton and the remnants of his host are north of us. Our enemies hold the Twins and Moat Cailin. Robb Stark sits to the west, so we cannot retreat to Lannisport and the Rock unless we choose to give battle. Jaime is taken, and his army for all purposes has ceased to exist. Thoros of Myr and Beric Dondarrion continue to plague our foraging parties. To our east we have the Arryns, Stannis Baratheon sits on Dragonstone, and in the south Highgarden and Storm’s End are calling their banners.”
“哟，老爸，”提利昂说，“听起来好像赞美哩。”他笑着往前靠去。“那么，史坦尼斯方面有何行动？他才是长兄，蓝礼只是三子。对于弟弟称王一事，他有何反应？”
Tyrion smiled crookedly. “Take heart, Father. At least Rhaegar Targaryen is still dead.”
父亲皱眉道：“从一开始，我就认为史坦尼斯比其他所有人加起来还要危险，但他却毫无动静。嗯，瓦里斯是有些情报，比如史坦尼斯正在建造船只，史坦尼斯正在招募佣兵，还说史坦尼斯从亚夏找来一个缚影师，可这究竟代表着什么？其中又有多少属实？”他有些恼怒地耸耸肩。“凯冯，拿地图来。”
“I had hoped you might have more to offer us than japes, Tyrion,” Lord Tywin Lannister said.
凯冯爵士即刻照办。泰温公爵展开皮地图，将之摊平。“詹姆留给我们一个烂摊子。卢斯·波顿及其残部在我们北方，我们的敌人还握有孪河城和卡林湾；另一方面，罗柏·史塔克坐镇西边，除非开战，我们无法退回兰尼斯特港和凯岩城。詹姆既已被捕，他的军队便也不复存在，密尔的索罗斯和贝里·唐德利恩将继续骚扰我们的征粮部队。往更远的方面看，东有艾林家族和盘据龙石岛的史坦尼斯·拜拉席恩，南边的高庭和风息堡也已经整兵待发。”
Ser Kevan frowned over the map, forehead creasing. “Robb Stark will have Edmure Tully and the lords of the Trident with him now. Their combined power may exceed our own. And with Roose Bolton behind us … Tywin, if we remain here, I fear we might be caught between three armies.”
提利昂狡猾地笑了笑。“父亲，别担心，至少雷加·坦格利安还没死而复生。”
“I have no intention of remaining here. We must finish our business with young Lord Stark before Renly Baratheon can march from Highgarden. Bolton does not concern me. He is a wary man, and we made him warier on the Green Fork. He will be slow to give pursuit. So … on the morrow, we make for Harrenhal. Kevan, I want Ser Addam’s outriders to screen our movements. Give him as many men as he requires, and send them out in groups of four. I will have no vanishings.”
“提利昂，我希望你能提供一点有用的建议，不要只要嘴皮子。”泰温·兰尼斯特公爵说。
“As you say, my lord, but … why Harrenhal? That is a grim, unlucky place. Some call it cursed.”
凯冯爵士看着地图皱眉，额头又挤成条条深缝。“眼下罗柏·史塔克得到艾德慕·徒利和三河诸侯的支持，他们的总兵力超过了我军，我们后方还有卢斯。波顿……泰温，留在这里，只怕会被三面夹击。”
“Let them,” Lord Tywin said. “Unleash Ser Gregor and send him before us with his reavers. Send forth Vargo Hoat and his freeriders as well, and Ser Amory Lorch. Each is to have three hundred horse. Tell them I want to see the riverlands afire from the Gods Eye to the Red Fork.”
“我不打算留在这里。我们得在蓝礼从高庭出兵前解决掉小史塔克公爵。波顿那边我不担心，他是个谨慎的人，想必绿叉河之战只会使他更谨慎，因此他的追击不会很快。所以……明日一早我们便朝赫伦堡出发。凯冯，命令亚当爵士的斥候掩蔽我军行踪，他要多少人就给他多少人，四人为一小队，不准再发生失踪的事……”
“They will burn, my lord,” Ser Kevan said, rising. “I shall give the commands.” He bowed and made for the door.
“遵命，大人，可是……为什么去赫伦堡？那是个阴森不祥的地方，听说还受了诅咒。”
When they were alone, Lord Tywin glanced at Tyrion. “Your savages might relish a bit of rapine. Tell them they may ride with Vargo Hoat and plunder as they like—goods, stock, women, they may take what they want and burn the rest.”
“让他们去说，”泰温公爵道，“把格雷果爵士放出去，要他领着那群屠夫四处劫掠。把瓦格·霍特和他的佣兵以及亚摩利·洛奇爵士也派出去，让他们各带三百骑兵，告诉他们：从神眼湖到红叉河，我希望河间地带化为焦土。”
“Telling Shagga and Timett how to pillage is like telling a rooster how to crow,” Tyrion commented, “but I should prefer to keep them with me.” Uncouth and unruly they might be, yet the wildlings were his , and he trusted them more than any of his father’s men. He was not about to hand them over.
“大人，请拭目以待。”凯冯爵士说罢起身。“我这就去传令。”他鞠躬离去。
“Then you had best learn to control them. I will not have the city plundered.”
剩下父子俩之后，泰温公爵瞄了提利昂一眼。“你的野蛮人可能也喜欢来点掠夺，你去通知他们：他们尽可以随瓦格·赫特出动，任意劫掠——不论财货、牲口还是女人，喜欢的就抢，不中意的就烧。”
“The city?” Tyrion was lost. “What city would that be?”
“教夏嘎和提魅如何抢劫，就跟教公鸡怎么报晓一般多此一举。”提利昂表示，“但我宁可把他们留在身边。”他们或许粗鲁难驯，但终究是他的手下，相较于父亲的人马，他宁愿信任自己的人。他可不想就这么将他们拱手让人。
“King’s Landing. I am sending you to court.”
“那你得学会如何管束他们，我不想见到他们在城里打家劫舍。”
It was the last thing Tyrion Lannister would ever have anticipated. He reached for his wine, and considered for a moment as he sipped. “And what am I to do there?”
“城里？”提利昂糊涂了，“哪个城？”
“Rule,” his father said curtly.
“君临。我要派你进宫。”
Tyrion hooted with laughter. “My sweet sister might have a word or two to say about that!”
这是提利昂·兰尼斯特最没预料到的事。他举起酒杯，边喝边想，“派我进宫做什么？”
“Let her say what she likes. Her son needs to be taken in hand before he ruins us all. I blame those jackanapes on the council—our friend Petyr, the venerable Grand Maester, and that cockless wonder Lord Varys. What sort of counsel are they giving Joffrey when he lurches from one folly to the next? Whose notion was it to make this Janos Slynt a lord? The man’s father was a butcher , and they grant him Harrenhal. Harrenhal , that was the seat of kings! Not that he will ever set foot inside it, if I have a say. I am told he took a bloody spear for his sigil. A bloody cleaver would have been my choice.” His father had not raised his voice, yet Tyrion could see the anger in the gold of his eyes. “And dismissing Selmy, where was the sense in that? Yes, the man was old, but the name of Barristan the Bold still has meaning in the realm. He lent honor to any man he served. Can anyone say the same of the Hound? You feed your dog bones under the table, you do not seat him beside you on the high bench.” He pointed a finger at Tyrion’s face. “If Cersei cannot curb the boy, you must. And if these councillors are playing us false …”
“管事。”父亲唐突地说。
Tyrion knew. “Spikes,” he sighed. “Heads. Walls.”
提利昂哈哈大笑。“我亲爱的老姐对此恐怕有意见哟！”
“I see you have taken a few lessons from me.”
“随她去说，总得有人管管她儿子，以免他把我们全部搞垮。我认为这都是那群三心二意的重臣搞的鬼——我们的朋友培提尔、年高德劭的大学士，还有那个少了老二的活宝瓦里斯大人。乔佛里做出一桩又一桩蠢事时，他们都在干什么？到底是谁出的馊主意，竟把这个杰诺斯·史林特拔擢为贵族？这家伙的父亲是个屠夫，而他们竟给了他赫伦堡，赫伦堡！那是国王住的城堡！只要我一息尚存，他就别想踏进去。听说他挑了一支染血长枪作家徽，假如我在，非逼他改成染血的菜刀不可。”父亲并未提高音量，但提利昂从他的金黄眼瞳里体会得出他的愤怒。“他们还赶走了赛尔弥，到底是哪根筋有问题？没错，他是一把年纪了，但‘无畏的巴利斯坦’光这名号在王国就很有份量，他服侍谁，谁就跟着沾光，猎狗起得了这种作用？狗是在桌子底下啃骨头的，不是拿来平起平坐的。”他伸出一根手指，指着提利昂的脸。“既然瑟曦管不了那小鬼，就由你来管。倘若那几个重臣胆敢跟我们耍两面派……”
“More than you know, Father,” Tyrion answered quietly. He finished his wine and set the cup aside, thoughtful. A part of him was more pleased than he cared to admit. Another part was remembering the battle upriver, and wondering if he was being sent to hold the left again. “Why me?” he asked, cocking his head to one side. “Why not my uncle? Why not Ser Addam or Ser Flement or Lord Serrett? Why not a … bigger man?”
提利昂太清楚了。“砍头，”他叹道，“枪尖插着，挂上城墙。”
Lord Tywin rose abruptly. “You are my son.”
“你总算还从我这儿学了点东西。”
That was when he knew. You have given him up for lost , he thought. You bloody bastard, you think Jaime’s good as dead, so I’m all you have left . Tyrion wanted to slap him, to spit in his face, to draw his dagger and cut the heart out of him and see if it was made of old hard gold, the way the smallfolks said. Yet he sat there, silent and still.
“父亲，我学的可多了。”提利昂平静地说。他喝干了酒，若有所思地把杯子放到一边。一方面，他很高兴，高兴到自己不敢承认的地步；另一方面，他又想起了不久前在绿叉河上游打的那场仗，不知自己是否又被派去防守“左翼”。“为什么派我？”他歪头问，“为何不派叔叔？为何不派亚当爵士、佛列蒙爵士或沙略特大人？为何不派……个头大点的人？”
The shards of the broken cup crunched beneath his father’s heels as Lord Tywin crossed the room. “One last thing,” he said at the door. “You will not take the whore to court.”
泰温公爵陡地起身。“因为你是我儿子。”
Tyrion sat alone in the common room for a long while after his father was gone. Finally he climbed the steps to his cozy garret beneath the bell tower. The ceiling was low, but that was scarcely a drawback for a dwarf. From the window, he could see the gibbet his father had erected in the yard. The innkeep’s body turned slowly on its rope whenever the night wind gusted. Her flesh had grown as thin and ragged as Lannister hopes.
他这才明白。原来你已经放弃他了，他心想，你这天杀的王八蛋，你认为詹姆与死无异，所以你只剩下了我。提利昂想一巴掌掴去，想朝他脸上吐口水，想抽出匕首把他的心掏出来，看看究竟是不是如老百姓所说的用黄金铸成。然而最终，他只是静静地坐着，一言不发。
Shae murmured sleepily and rolled toward him when he sat on the edge of the featherbed. He slid his hand under the blanket and cupped a soft breast, and her eyes opened. “M’lord,” she said with a drowsy smile.
泰温公爵穿过房间，碎酒杯在他脚下喀啦作响。“最后一件事，”他走到门边时说，“不准你带那个妓女进宫。”
When he felt her nipple stiffen, Tyrion kissed her. “I have a mind to take you to King’s Landing, sweetling,” he whispered.
父亲离去之后，提利昂在旅店大厅里静坐良久，最后他终于爬上楼梯，回到钟塔下舒适的阁楼房。房间的天花板虽矮，但对侏儒来说并无妨碍。从窗户看出去，他见到父亲在院子里搭的绞刑架，夜风吹起，绳子上老板娘的尸体便晃个不休。她身上的肌肉就和兰尼斯特家的希望一般微薄而破败。
