*EDDARD
第五章 艾德
来访的队伍如同一条由金、银和钢铁交融而成的璀璨河流，浩浩荡荡涌进城堡大门。他们为数一共三百，由引以为傲的封臣与骑士、誓言骑士①和自由骑手所组成。冰冷的北风拍打着他们头顶高举的十数面金色旗帜，上面绣了象征拜拉席恩家族的宝冠雄鹿。
T he visitors poured through the castle gates in a river of gold and silver and polished steel, three hundred strong, a pride of bannermen and knights, of sworn swords and freeriders. Over their heads a dozen golden banners whipped back and forth in the northern wind, emblazoned with the crowned stag of Baratheon.
队伍中有不少奈德熟悉的面孔。一头亮眼金发的是詹姆·兰尼斯特爵士，脸带烧伤的是桑铎·克里冈。他身旁的高大男孩一定是王储，而他们身后的那个畸形矮子则毫无疑问是“小恶魔”提利昂·兰尼斯特了。
Ned knew many of the riders. There came Ser Jaime Lannister with hair as bright as beaten gold, and there Sandor Clegane with his terrible burned face. The tall boy beside him could only be the crown prince, and that stunted little man behind them was surely the Imp, Tyrion Lannister.
然而那个走在队伍前列，由两名雪白披风御林铁卫随侍左右的人，在奈德眼里竟像个陌生人……一直到对方翻身跳下战马，发出熟悉的洪钟呐喊，然后一把抱住他，差点把他全身骨头拆散，他方才认出来者是谁。“奈德！啊，见到你真好，尤其是看到你那张冻得发紫的脸。”国王仔仔细细地上下打量他一番，然后朗声笑道，“你真是一点都没变。”
Yet the huge man at the head of the column, flanked by two knights in the snow-white cloaks of the Kingsguard, seemed almost a stranger to Ned … until he vaulted off the back of his warhorse with a familiar roar, and crushed him in a bone-crunching hug. “Ned! Ah, but it is good to see that frozen face of yours.” The king looked him over top to bottom, and laughed. “You have not changed at all.”
要是奈德也能对他说同样的话就好了。十五年前，当他们并肩为王位而奋战时，这位风息堡公爵是个面容修整干净，眼神清澈，让怀春少女梦寐以求的精壮男子。他身高六尺五寸，如巍然巨塔，在众人之中似鹤立鸡群。当他身披战甲，头戴双叉鹿角巨盔，则成了个名副其实的巨人。他的力气也不输巨人，惯用的那柄铁刺战锤连奈德都只能勉强举起。在那些岁月里，皮革和血的气味就如贵妇身上的香水，和他如影随形。
Would that Ned had been able to say the same. Fifteen years past, when they had ridden forth to win a throne, the Lord of Storm’s End had been clean-shaven, clear-eyed, and muscled like a maiden’s fantasy. Six and a half feet tall, he towered over lesser men, and when he donned his armor and the great antlered helmet of his House, he became a veritable giant. He’d had a giant’s strength too, his weapon of choice a spiked iron warhammer that Ned could scarcely lift. In those days, the smell of leather and blood had clung to him like perfume.
如今香水却当真和他如影随形了。他的腰围也变得和身高同样惊人。奈德上次见到国王，始自九年前的巴隆·葛雷乔伊之乱。那时雄鹿与冰原狼的旗帜齐飞，七国军队合力征讨那自立为铁群岛之王的领主。胜利之夜，两人并肩站在葛雷乔伊家族陷落的堡垒大厅里，劳勃接受叛军首领的降书，奈德则将其幼子席恩收为养子，之后劳勃起码胖了八石。如今虽有一团粗黑如铁丝的胡子遮住他肥胖的双下巴，却没有东西可以掩盖他突出的小腹和凹陷的黑眼圈。
Now it was perfume that clung to him like perfume, and he had a girth to match his height. Ned had last seen the king nine years before during Balon Greyjoy’s rebellion, when the stag and the direwolf had joined to end the pretensions of the self-proclaimed King of the Iron Islands. Since the night they had stood side by side in Greyjoy’s fallen stronghold, where Robert had accepted the rebel lord’s surrender and Ned had taken his son Theon as hostage and ward, the king had gained at least eight stone. A beard as coarse and black as iron wire covered his jaw to hide his double chin and the sag of the royal jowls, but nothing could hide his stomach or the dark circles under his eyes.
但劳勃终究是奈德的国君，而不仅仅是朋友，所以他只说：“陛下，临冬城听候您差遣。”
Yet Robert was Ned’s king now, and not just a friend, so he said only, “Your Grace. Winterfell is yours.”
此时其他人纷纷下马，城里的马夫过来照料马匹。劳勃的王后，瑟曦·兰尼斯特带着她年幼的孩子们走进城里。他们乘坐的轮宫乃是一辆巨大的双层马车，以油亮的橡木和镶滚金边的金属搭建而成，由四十匹骏马共同拖拉，因为太宽，只得停在城门外。奈德在雪地里跪下，亲吻王后手上的戒指，劳勃则像是拥抱自己失散已久的妹妹般地拥抱了凯特琳。接着孩子们被带上前来，彼此正式介绍过后，得到双方家长的赞许。
By then the others were dismounting as well, and grooms were coming forward for their mounts. Robert’s queen, Cersei Lannister, entered on foot with her younger children. The wheelhouse in which they had ridden, a huge double-decked carriage of oiled oak and gilded metal pulled by forty heavy draft horses, was too wide to pass through the castle gate. Ned knelt in the snow to kiss the queen’s ring, while Robert embraced Catelyn like a long-lost sister. Then the children had been brought forward, introduced, and approved of by both sides.
正式的见面礼仪刚结束，国王便说：“艾德，带我到你们家墓窖去，我要聊表敬意。”
No sooner had those formalities of greeting been completed than the king had said to his host, “Take me down to your crypt, Eddard. I would pay my respects.”
奈德就爱他这点，都过了这么多年，他依旧对她念念不忘。他叫人拿来提灯。一切都尽在不言之中。王后开口反对，她说大家打清早起就在赶路，这时人人又冷又倦，应该先稍事休息，要看死人也用不着这么急。她话说到这里，只见劳勃冷冷地盯着她，她的孪生弟弟詹姆静静地握住她的手，她也就没再说下去。
Ned loved him for that, for remembering her still after all these years. He called for a lantern. No other words were needed. The queen had begun to protest. They had been riding since dawn, everyone was tired and cold, surely they should refresh themselves first. The dead would wait. She had said no more than that; Robert had looked at her, and her twin brother Jaime had taken her quietly by the arm, and she had said no more.
于是奈德和他几乎快不认得的国王一同往地下墓窖走去。通往墓窖的螺旋楼梯非常狭窄，所以奈德打着灯走在前面。“我原本都快以为我们永远也到不了临冬城了，”劳勃边下楼边抱怨，“南方住久了，成天听人说我的七大王国如何如何，很容易就忘记你的领地和其他六国加起来一样大。”
They went down to the crypt together, Ned and this king he scarcely recognized. The winding stone steps were narrow. Ned went first with the lantern. “I was starting to think we would never reach Winterfell,” Robert complained as they descended. “In the south, the way they talk about my Seven Kingdoms, a man forgets that your part is as big as the other six combined.”
“陛下，相信您这趟旅途一定很愉快吧？”
“I trust you enjoyed the journey, Your Grace?”
劳勃哼了一声，“一路上到处都是沼泽、树林和田野，过了颈泽后连间像样的旅店都找不着。我这辈子还没见过这么广袤无边的冷野荒芜，你的子民都躲哪儿去了？”
Robert snorted. “Bogs and forests and fields, and scarcely a decent inn north of the Neck. I’ve never seen such a vast emptiness. Where are all your people?”
“多半是害羞不敢出来吧。”奈德打趣道，他感觉得到一股寒意自地窖席卷而上，有如幽深地底的冰冷气息。“在北方，国王可不是天天都见得着的。”
“Likely they were too shy to come out,” Ned jested. He could feel the chill coming up the stairs, a cold breath from deep within the earth. “Kings are a rare sight in the north.”
劳勃又哼了一声，“我看是躲在厚厚的积雪底下去了吧！奈德，都什么时候了你们这儿还冰天雪地！”国王边下楼边伸手扶着墙壁，稳住身子。
Robert snorted. “More likely they were hiding under the snow. Snow , Ned!” The king put one hand on the wall to steady himself as they descended.
“晚夏降雪在北方是稀松平常的事情，”奈德说，“希望没给您带来什么困扰，夏末的雪通常都不大。”
“Late summer snows are common enough,” Ned said. “I hope they did not trouble you. They are usually mild.”
“这叫做不大？异鬼才相信！”劳勃骂道，“那等到冬天你们这要冷成什么样子？我光想想就浑身发抖。”
“The Others take your mild snows,” Robert swore. “What will this place be like in winter? I shudder to think.”
“北方的冬天很冷很苦，”奈德承认，“但史塔克家族会熬过去的，这么多年来我们不是一直都熬过来了吗？”
“The winters are hard,” Ned admitted. “But the Starks will endure. We always have.”
“你真该来南方看看，”劳勃对他说：“趁夏天还没结束好好见识一下。高庭的原野放眼望去尽是金黄玫瑰。水果甜熟到会在你口中爆开，有甜瓜、蜜桃还有火梅，我保证你绝对没尝过这么甜美的东西。你待会儿就知道了，我这次给你捎了点过来。就算在风息堡，当热风吹起，天气热得你几乎无法动弹。奈德，你真该看看南方市镇的模样！遍地繁花，市集里的食物车载斗量；夏季的葡萄酒不但好喝，而且便宜得不像话，光闻闻市场里的酒味都会醉。人人都丰衣足食，喝得醉醺醺，吃得肥嘟嘟。”他咧嘴笑道，又用手拍了拍自己的啤酒肚。“奈德，还有南方的女孩子啊！”他的眼里焕发着光芒，高声叫道，“我敢跟你保证，只要天一热，女人的矜持就全不见了。她们会直接光着身子，在城堡附近的河里裸泳。就算上了街，也是热得穿不住毛衣皮衣，所以有钱的就穿丝织短袖，穷一点就穿棉质的。不过只要一流汗，衣服贴着皮肤，根本就和脱光光没两样。”国王开心地笑着。
“You need to come south,” Robert told him. “You need a taste of summer before it flees. In Highgarden there are fields of golden roses that stretch away as far as the eye can see. The fruits are so ripe they explode in your mouth—melons, peaches, fireplums, you’ve never tasted such sweetness. You’ll see, I brought you some. Even at Storm’s End, with that good wind off the bay, the days are so hot you can barely move. And you ought to see the towns, Ned! Flowers everywhere, the markets bursting with food, the summerwines so cheap and so good that you can get drunk just breathing the air. Everyone is fat and drunk and rich.” He laughed and slapped his own ample stomach a thump. “And the girls , Ned!” he exclaimed, his eyes sparkling. “I swear, women lose all modesty in the heat. They swim naked in the river, right beneath the castle. Even in the streets, it’s too damn hot for wool or fur, so they go around in these short gowns, silk if they have the silver and cotton if not, but it’s all the same when they start sweating and the cloth sticks to their skin, they might as well be naked.” The king laughed happily.
劳勃·拜拉席恩向来是个物欲旺盛，很懂享受的人。这一点他没有变，但是奈德没法不注意国王为声色娱乐所付出的代价。当他们抵达楼梯底端，进入墓窖的深沉黑暗时，劳勃已经气喘吁吁，呼吸困难，在灯光照映下面红耳赤了。
Robert Baratheon had always been a man of huge appetites, a man who knew how to take his pleasures. That was not a charge anyone could lay at the door of Eddard Stark. Yet Ned could not help but notice that those pleasures were taking a toll on the king. Robert was breathing heavily by the time they reached the bottom of the stairs, his face red in the lantern light as they stepped out into the darkness of the crypt.
“陛下请进，”奈德恭谨地说，然后将灯笼绕了个半圆。黑影鬼祟潜动，摇曳的火光照上脚底的石板，左右显现出两两成对的花岗岩柱，一直延展到远处的黑暗。历代逝者端坐石柱间的石制宝座上，背向墙壁，身后靠着存放遗体的石棺。“她在最后面，就在父亲和布兰登旁边。”
“Your Grace,” Ned said respectfully. He swept the lantern in a wide semicircle. Shadows moved and lurched. Flickering light touched the stones underfoot and brushed against a long procession of granite pillars that marched ahead, two by two, into the dark. Between the pillars, the dead sat on their stone thrones against the walls, backs against the sepulchres that contained their mortal remains. “She is down at the end, with Father and Brandon.”
他领路在前，穿梭于石柱间的过道，劳勃被地底的阴寒冻得直打哆嗦，默然无语地跟随其后。墓窖里总是冷的，他们走在史塔克家族历代的死者之间，足音回响在偌大的陵墓里。历代临冬城领主注视着他们，紧闭石棺上的雕像刻有他们生前的容貌，巨大的咆哮冰原狼石雕则蜷缩脚下。他们并列而坐，用再也看不见的眼睛注视着永寂的黑暗。生者的走动仿佛惊动了他们，墙壁上轮换着窜动的黑影。
He led the way between the pillars and Robert followed wordlessly, shivering in the subterranean chill. It was always cold down here. Their footsteps rang off the stones and echoed in the vault overhead as they walked among the dead of House Stark. The Lords of Winterfell watched them pass. Their likenesses were carved into the stones that sealed the tombs. In long rows they sat, blind eyes staring out into eternal darkness, while great stone direwolves curled round their feet. The shifting shadows made the stone figures seem to stir as the living passed by.
根据传统，凡是曾为临冬城之主的石像膝上都要放置一把铁制长剑，以确保这些含恨的复仇怨灵被封印在陵墓里，不致到阳间肆虐。其中最古老的早已锈蚀殆尽，原本放置宝剑的地方如今只剩红褐铁锈。奈德不禁扪心自问，这是否意味着那些幽魂如今可以恣意兴扰城堡？早先的临冬城主坚毅刚强一如他们脚底下的土地，在龙王尚未渡海来犯的日子里，他们不向任何人低头，自封为北境之王。
By ancient custom an iron longsword had been laid across the lap of each who had been Lord of Winterfell, to keep the vengeful spirits in their crypts. The oldest had long ago rusted away to nothing, leaving only a few red stains where the metal had rested on stone. Ned wondered if that meant those ghosts were free to roam the castle now. He hoped not. The first Lords of Winterfell had been men hard as the land they ruled. In the centuries before the Dragonlords came over the sea, they had sworn allegiance to no man, styling themselves the Kings in the North.
奈德停下脚步，举起油灯，陵墓仍然持续向前延伸，没入黑暗，然而之后的都是空位，没有封上，有如等待死者的黑洞，等待着他和他的子女。奈德想到这里就不舒服：“在这儿。”他对国王说。
Ned stopped at last and lifted the oil lantern. The crypt continued on into darkness ahead of them, but beyond this point the tombs were empty and unsealed; black holes waiting for their dead, waiting for him and his children. Ned did not like to think on that. “Here,” he told his king.
劳勃静静地点头，跪了下来，低头行礼。
Robert nodded silently, knelt, and bowed his head.
眼前共有三个并肩排列的石棺，奈德的父亲瑞卡德·史塔克有张严峻的长脸，当年的雕刻师父把他的神韵掌握得很好，他庄严地坐定，石指紧紧握住膝上横躺的宝剑，然而当年倾国的剑都救不了他。在他两旁较小的石棺里，则是他的子女。
There were three tombs, side by side. Lord Rickard Stark, Ned’s father, had a long, stern face. The stonemason had known him well. He sat with quiet dignity, stone fingers holding tight to the sword across his lap, but in life all swords had failed him. In two smaller sepulchres on either side were his children.
布兰登死时不过二十，他就在和奔流城的凯特琳·徒利成婚前不久，被“疯王”伊里斯·坦格利安二世残忍地绞死。他父亲被迫全程目睹爱子惨死的经过。其实布兰登才是临冬城真正的继承人，他既是长子，又是天生的领袖。
Brandon had been twenty when he died, strangled by order of the Mad King Aerys Targaryen only a few short days before he was to wed Catelyn Tully of Riverrun. His father had been forced to watch him die. He was the true heir, the eldest, born to rule.
莱安娜香消玉殒那时年方十六，还是个童心未泯的女孩。奈德全心全意地疼爱着这个妹妹，劳勃对她的爱犹有过之。她原本是要当他新娘的。
Lyanna had only been sixteen, a child-woman of surpassing loveliness. Ned had loved her with all his heart. Robert had loved her even more. She was to have been his bride.
“她比这漂亮多了。”一阵沉默之后，国王开口。他的眼光仍眷恋在莱安娜脸上不忍离去，仿佛这样可以将她唤回人世。最后他终于站起身，步履却因肥胖而显得有些不稳。“妈的，奈德，真有必要把她葬在这种地方么？”他的声音因为忆起的悲痛而嘶哑起来，“她不该与阴暗为伍……”
“She was more beautiful than that,” the king said after a silence. His eyes lingered on Lyanna’s face, as if he could will her back to life. Finally he rose, made awkward by his weight. “Ah, damn it, Ned, did you have to bury her in a place like this?” His voice was hoarse with remembered grief. “She deserved more than darkness …”
“她是临冬城史塔克家族的人，”奈德平静地说，“她属于这里。”
“She was a Stark of Winterfell,” Ned said quietly. “This is her place.”
“她应该安葬在风景优美的山丘上，坟上种棵果树，头顶有阳光白云与她为伴，有风霜雨露为她沐浴。”
“She should be on a hill somewhere, under a fruit tree, with the sun and clouds above her and the rain to wash her clean.”
“她临终前我就在她身边，”奈德提醒国王，“她只想回家，长眠在布兰登和父亲身边。”他至今还偶尔能听得见她死前的呓语。答应我，她在那个弥漫血腥和玫瑰馨香的房间里朝他喊，奈德，答应我。迟迟不退的高烧吸走了她全部的力量，当时的她气若游丝。但当他保证将信守诺言时，妹妹眼里的恐惧顿时一扫而空。奈德记得她最后的微笑，还有她如何紧抓他的手，随后离开人世，玫瑰花瓣自她掌心倾流而出，沉暗而无生气。在那之后发生了什么，他全都不记得。当人们找到他时，他仍然紧紧抱着她了无生气的躯体，哀恸得难以言语。据说最后是那个矮小的泽地人霍兰·黎德将她的手自他手中抽开，奈德自己一片茫然。“我一有机会就会带花来看她，”他说，“莱安娜她……一直很喜欢花。”
“I was with her when she died,” Ned reminded the king. “She wanted to come home, to rest beside Brandon and Father.” He could hear her still at times. Promise me , she had cried, in a room that smelled of blood and roses. Promise me, Ned . The fever had taken her strength and her voice had been faint as a whisper, but when he gave her his word, the fear had gone out of his sister’s eyes. Ned remembered the way she had smiled then, how tightly her fingers had clutched his as she gave up her hold on life, the rose petals spilling from her palm, dead and black. After that he remembered nothing. They had found him still holding her body, silent with grief. The little crannogman, Howland Reed, had taken her hand from his. Ned could recall none of it. “I bring her flowers when I can,” he said. “Lyanna was … fond of flowers.”
国王摸了摸她的脸颊，手指温柔地滑过粗砺的岩石表面，好似在爱抚活生生的恋人。“我发誓杀雷加为她报仇。”
The king touched her cheek, his fingers brushing across the rough stone as gently as if it were living flesh. “I vowed to kill Rhaegar for what he did to her.”
“你已经杀了他。”奈德提醒他。
“You did,” Ned reminded him.
“只杀了一次。”劳勃满腹酸楚地说。
“Only once,” Robert said bitterly.
两个死敌当年在三河交汇处的沙洲浅滩上碰面，炽烈的战火在四周蔓延。劳勃手持他的铁刺战锤，头戴鹿角巨盔；坦格利安王子则全身黑甲，胸铠上用红宝石镶成象征家族纹章的三头巨龙，在烈日照耀下有若熊熊烈火。两人鏖战不休，三叉戟河的河水在战马铁蹄下染成血红，直到最后劳勃的战锤击碎了对手铠甲上的三头龙，穿过铠甲下的躯体。奈德赶到现场时，雷加已经倒卧河中，气绝身亡；双方士兵在水里争抢从他铠甲上掉落的红宝石，激起翻飞水花。
They had come together at the ford of the Trident while the battle crashed around them, Robert with his warhammer and his great antlered helm, the Targaryen prince armored all in black. On his breastplate was the three-headed dragon of his House, wrought all in rubies that flashed like fire in the sunlight. The waters of the Trident ran red around the hooves of their destriers as they circled and clashed, again and again, until at last a crushing blow from Robert’s hammer stove in the dragon and the chest beneath it. When Ned had finally come on the scene, Rhaegar lay dead in the stream, while men of both armies scrabbled in the swirling waters for rubies knocked free of his armor.
“每晚在梦中，我都要杀他一次。”劳勃道，“就算再杀他个一千遍，他还是死有余辜。”
“In my dreams, I kill him every night,” Robert admitted. “A thousand deaths will still be less than he deserves.”
奈德不知道该说什么才好。又一阵沉默后，他说：“陛下，我们该回去了，王后正等着呢。”
There was nothing Ned could say to that. After a quiet, he said, “We should return, Your Grace. Your wife will be waiting.”
“王后王后，就算异鬼抓走她又如何？”劳勃尖酸地喃喃道，但他还是脚步蹒跚，沉重地朝来时的方向走去。“还有，你要敢再叫我一声陛下，我一定把你枭首示众。咱们之间可不只是君臣关系而已。”
“The Others take my wife,” Robert muttered sourly, but he started back the way they had come, his footsteps falling heavily. “And if I hear ‘Your Grace’ once more, I’ll have your head on a spike. We are more to each other than that.”
“我不敢忘。”奈德静静地回答。眼看国王没有答话，他便问，“跟我说说琼恩的事。”
“I had not forgotten,” Ned replied quietly. When the king did not answer, he said, “Tell me about Jon.”
劳勃摇摇头：“我这辈子没看过一个人病情恶化得那么迅速。为了庆祝我儿子的命名日，我们举办了一场比武竞技，当天见了他，你一定会认为他健康得能长命百岁。但两个星期之后他就死了，得的病像把烈火，活活把他给燃尽。”劳勃在一根石柱边停下来，正好站在一个死去已久的史塔克族人面前。“我好敬爱那个老人啊。”
Robert shook his head. “I have never seen a man sicken so quickly. We gave a tourney on my son’s name day. If you had seen Jon then, you would have sworn he would live forever. A fortnight later he was dead. The sickness was like a fire in his gut. It burned right through him.” He paused beside a pillar, before the tomb of a long-dead Stark. “I loved that old man.”
“我们都一样。”奈德停了一会儿，“凯特琳很为她妹妹担心，莱莎还好吗？”
“We both did.” Ned paused a moment. “Catelyn fears for her sister. How does Lysa bear her grief?”
劳勃的嘴角苦涩地扭了扭，“坦白说，一点也不好。”他顿了顿，“奈德，我认为琼恩的死把那个女人给逼疯了。她已经带着儿子逃回了鹰巢城。我是不希望她这么做的，我本来打算把他过继给凯岩城的泰温·兰尼斯特。琼恩既没有兄弟，又只有这么一个儿子，我怎么能让个女人家独自抚养他长大呢？”
Robert’s mouth gave a bitter twist. “Not well, in truth,” he admitted. “I think losing Jon has driven the woman mad, Ned. She has taken the boy back to the Eyrie. Against my wishes. I had hoped to foster him with Tywin Lannister at Casterly Rock. Jon had no brothers, no other sons. Was I supposed to leave him to be raised by women?”
奈德宁可把孩子交给毒蛇抚养，也不愿意交给泰温公爵，但他没说出口。有些旧伤永难愈合，只需简短几字，就会再汩汩流血。“她刚失去丈夫，”他小心翼翼地说，“或许做母亲的害怕再失去儿子吧，况且那孩子年纪还小。”
Ned would sooner entrust a child to a pit viper than to Lord Tywin, but he left his doubts unspoken. Some old wounds never truly heal, and bleed again at the slightest word. “The wife has lost the husband,” he said carefully. “Perhaps the mother feared to lose the son. The boy is very young.”
“六岁，成天病恹恹，这种人是新任鹰巢城公爵，诸神饶了我罢。”国王咒骂，“泰温公爵以前从没收过养子，莱莎应该觉得光荣才对。兰尼斯特家族历史悠久，势力又大，可她竟然连考虑都不肯考虑，也没得到我准许，就趁着月黑风高不声不响离开了。瑟曦差点没气炸。”他深深地叹了口气，“你知道吗？那孩子的名是照着我取的，叫劳勃·艾林。我发誓要保护他，怎么能让他母亲就这样把他偷偷带走呢？”
“Six, and sickly, and Lord of the Eyrie, gods have mercy,” the king swore. “Lord Tywin had never taken a ward before. Lysa ought to have been honored. The Lannisters are a great and noble House. She refused to even hear of it. Then she left in the dead of night, without so much as a by-your-leave. Cersei was furious.” He sighed deeply. “The boy is my namesake, did you know that? Robert Arryn. I am sworn to protect him. How can I do that if his mother steals him away?”
“不如让我来收养他，你意下如何？”奈德说，“莱莎应该会同意。她年轻时和凯特琳很亲，她来这儿也会比较有家的感觉。”
“I will take him as ward, if you wish,” Ned said. “Lysa should consent to that. She and Catelyn were close as girls, and she would be welcome here as well.”
“我的老友啊，你是个好人。”国王回答，“只可惜为时已晚。泰温公爵既然同意收养，如果又把那孩子转到别的地方，对他是种侮辱。”
“A generous offer, my friend,” the king said, “but too late. Lord Tywin has already given his consent. Fostering the boy elsewhere would be a grievous affront to him.”
“我关心的是我外甥的幸福，而不在乎兰尼斯特家族高兴不高兴。”奈德表示。
“I have more concern for my nephew’s welfare than I do for Lannister pride,” Ned declared.
“那是因为你晚上不用陪兰尼斯特家的女人睡觉，”劳勃放声大笑，笑声在墓窖里回荡，在拱形屋顶上反射，那笑容是浓密黑虬髯里的一条白线。“呵，奈德，”他说，“你还是老样子，太严肃了。”他伸出巨大的手臂环住奈德的肩膀，“我本想过几天再跟你谈这件事，但你既然提起，就现在说罢。来，我们走。”
“That is because you do not sleep with a Lannister.” Robert laughed, the sound rattling among the tombs and bouncing from the vaulted ceiling. His smile was a flash of white teeth in the thicket of the huge black beard. “Ah, Ned,” he said, “you are still too serious.” He put a massive arm around Ned’s shoulders. “I had planned to wait a few days to speak to you, but I see now there’s no need for it. Come, walk with me.”
他们朝墓窖的出口走去，穿梭于石柱之间，两旁的史塔克死者空洞的眼神仿佛正跟随他们的脚步。国王依旧搂着奈德：“你一定想不透，隔了这么多年，为什么现在我才到临冬城来。”
They started back down between the pillars. Blind stone eyes seemed to follow them as they passed. The king kept his arm around Ned’s shoulder. “You must have wondered why I finally came north to Winterfell, after so long.”
奈德确有几个可能的猜测，但他没说出来。“我看，想来和我作伴？”他故作轻松地说，“不然就是绝境长城的缘故。陛下，您一定要去看看，在城墙上亲自走一遭，再和守军谈谈。守夜人部队如今已没有过去的盛况，班扬说……”
Ned had his suspicions, but he did not give them voice. “For the joy of my company, surely,” he said lightly. “And there is the Wall. You need to see it, Your Grace, to walk along its battlements and talk to those who man it. The Night’s Watch is a shadow of what it once was. Benjen says—”
“相信我很快就有机会当面和你弟弟聊聊，”劳勃道，“至于绝境长城，已经在那儿多久了？八千多年了罢，再撑个几天应该没问题。我有更要紧的事要跟你说，如今时局紧张，我需要信得过的得力助手，就像琼恩·艾林那样的人。他既是鹰巢城公爵，又是东境守护和御前首相，要找到合适的替代人选可不容易。”
“No doubt I will hear what your brother says soon enough,” Robert said. “The Wall has stood for what, eight thousand years? It can keep a few days more. I have more pressing concerns. These are difficult times. I need good men about me. Men like Jon Arryn. He served as Lord of the Eyrie, as Warden of the East, as the Hand of the King. He will not be easy to replace.”
“他儿子……”奈德开口。
“His son …” Ned began.
“他的儿子会继承鹰巢城公爵爵位，以及麾下领地所有税赋。”劳勃打断他，“就这样了。”
“His son will succeed to the Eyrie and all its incomes,” Robert said brusquely. “No more.”
奈德大吃一惊，错愕地停下脚步，转身面对国王，脱口便道：“艾林家族世代担任东境守护，这是个世袭的职位啊。”
That took Ned by surprise. He stopped, startled, and turned to look at his king. The words came unbidden. “The Arryns have always been Wardens of the East. The title goes with the domain.”
“等他长大成人，我再考虑要不要交还给他。”劳勃说，“然而我首先要打算的是今年和往后的几年。奈德，六岁的小男孩没法统率军队。”
“Perhaps when he comes of age, the honor can be restored to him,” Robert said. “I have this year to think of, and next. A six-year-old boy is no war leader, Ned.”
“这头衔在承平时期不过是个荣誉职，就让那孩子保留这个称号吧。就算不为了他，为了他那一生为国鞠躬尽瘁的父亲，这也是应该的。”
“In peace, the title is only an honor. Let the boy keep it. For his father’s sake if not his own. Surely you owe Jon that much for his service.”
国王听了不大高兴，把手从奈德肩膀上抽了回来：“琼恩鞠躬尽瘁是他职责所在，他本来就该对他的君王效忠。奈德，我不是忘恩负义的人，这点你应该最清楚。但那孩子可不是他父亲，一个稚龄幼儿绝对治理不了东方。”他的语气缓和下来，“不说这些了，我有更要紧的事跟你商量，而且这次我不准你跟我争辩。”劳勃紧握住奈德的手肘，“奈德，我有事需要你帮忙。”
The king was not pleased. He took his arm from around Ned’s shoulders. “Jon’s service was the duty he owed his liege lord. I am not ungrateful, Ned. You of all men ought to know that. But the son is not the father. A mere boy cannot hold the east.” Then his tone softened. “Enough of this. There is a more important office to discuss, and I would not argue with you.” Robert grasped Ned by the elbow. “I have need of you, Ned.”
“陛下，我永远任您差遣。”
“I am yours to command, Your Grace. Always.” They were words he had to say, and so he said them, apprehensive about what might come next.
他虽然很担心国王的下一步，却不得不这么说。
Robert scarcely seemed to hear him. “Those years we spent in the Eyrie … gods , those were good years. I want you at my side again, Ned. I want you down in King’s Landing, not up here at the end of the world where you are no damned use to anybody.” Robert looked off into the darkness, for a moment as melancholy as a Stark. “I swear to you, sitting a throne is a thousand times harder than winning one. Laws are a tedious business and counting coppers is worse. And the people … there is no end of them. I sit on that damnable iron chair and listen to them complain until my mind is numb and my ass is raw. They all want something, money or land or justice. The lies they tell … and my lords and ladies are no better. I am surrounded by flatterers and fools. It can drive a man to madness, Ned. Half of them don’t dare tell me the truth, and the other half can’t find it. There are nights I wish we had lost at the Trident. Ah, no, not truly, but …”
劳勃好像根本就没听他说话，只自顾自地续道：“想想我们一起在鹰巢城度过的那几年……妈的，好一段快乐时光！奈德，我希望你能再次陪在我身边，我希望你能南下到君临与我共商国事，不要一个人躲在世界的尽头，毫无用武之地。”劳勃望向远处的昏暗，突然像个史塔克族人般忧郁地说：“我向你发誓，坐在铁王座上管理国政，比夺取王位要难上千倍。法律仲裁是件累煞人的事，清算国库更麻烦。还有那些没完没了的平民百姓，我成天坐在那该死的铁椅子上听他们怨东怨西，听得我脑筋麻木，屁股酸痛。每个人一开口就是要钱，不然就是要土地或法律仲裁。全是些满口胡言的家伙，偏偏我的大臣贵妇们也好不到哪里去。我身边都是些白痴和马屁精，奈德，这真会把人逼疯的。他们要么稀里糊涂，要么故意说谎。有时候我睡觉，还真希望咱们当年在三叉戟河吃了败仗。啊，我不是说真吃了败仗，只是……”
“I understand,” Ned said softly.
“我了解。”奈德轻轻地说。
Robert looked at him. “I think you do. If so, you are the only one, my old friend.” He smiled. “Lord Eddard Stark, I would name you the Hand of the King.”
劳勃看着他：“老朋友，我想也只有你能够了解。”他面带微笑，“艾德·史塔克大人，我将任命你为国王之手，即御前首相。”
Ned dropped to one knee. The offer did not surprise him; what other reason could Robert have had for coming so far? The Hand of the King was the second-most powerful man in the Seven Kingdoms. He spoke with the king’s voice, commanded the king’s armies, drafted the king’s laws. At times he even sat upon the Iron Throne to dispense king’s justice, when the king was absent, or sick, or otherwise indisposed. Robert was offering him a responsibility as large as the realm itself.
奈德单膝跪下。他并不意外，除了这个原因，劳勃还会为了什么千里迢迢北上呢？御前首相是七大王国中一人之下，万人之上的显赫要职，他将代表国王发号施令、运用权威、统御三军、执掌司法。遇到国王缺席、生病或其他突发事件，他甚至会坐上铁王座，直接统治国家。劳勃等于是将王国交到他手中。
It was the last thing in the world he wanted.
而这，却是他最最不想要的。
“Your Grace,” he said. “I am not worthy of the honor.”
“陛下，”他说，“恐怕我的能力不足以胜任此等要职。”
Robert groaned with good-humored impatience. “If I wanted to honor you, I’d let you retire. I am planning to make you run the kingdom and fight the wars while I eat and drink and wench myself into an early grave.” He slapped his gut and grinned. “You know the saying, about the king and his Hand?”
劳勃高兴地发出一声佯装不耐的咕哝，“我要真为你着想，早让你退休啦。我是打算让你来治理国家，带兵打仗，而我自己呢？痛痛快快地吃喝玩乐，嫖个过瘾。”他拍拍肚皮，嘿嘿笑道：“你知道那句形容国王和首相的谚语吧？”
Ned knew the saying. “What the king dreams,” he said, “the Hand builds.”
奈德当然知道。“国王做梦，”他说，“首相筑梦。”
“I bedded a fishmaid once who told me the lowborn have a choicer way to put it. The king eats, they say, and the Hand takes the shit.” He threw back his head and roared his laughter. The echoes rang through the darkness, and all around them the dead of Winterfell seemed to watch with cold and disapproving eyes.
“有个跟我上床的渔家女孩告诉我，他们中下阶层的百姓有个更妙的比喻：国王吃席，首相拉屎。”
Finally the laughter dwindled and stopped. Ned was still on one knee, his eyes upraised. “Damn it, Ned,” the king complained. “You might at least humor me with a smile.”
此话一出，他仰头狂笑，回音响彻黑暗，四面八方的临冬城死者却似乎很不以为然地冷眼旁观。当笑声终止，奈德仍然单膝跪地，眼睛上扬。“妈的，奈德，”国王抱怨，“你好歹也跟我一起笑一笑？”
“They say it grows so cold up here in winter that a man’s laughter freezes in his throat and chokes him to death,” Ned said evenly. “Perhaps that is why the Starks have so little humor.”
“有人说这里的冬天太冷，人若是笑了，声音会冻结在喉咙里，直到把人活活噎死。”奈德平静地说，“或许这就是为什么我们史塔克家人甚少有幽默感。”
“Come south with me, and I’ll teach you how to laugh again,” the king promised. “You helped me win this damnable throne, now help me hold it. We were meant to rule together. If Lyanna had lived, we should have been brothers, bound by blood as well as affection. Well, it is not too late. I have a son. You have a daughter. My Joff and your Sansa shall join our houses, as Lyanna and I might once have done.”
“跟我一起到南方去，我一定让你再露笑颜。”国王向他保证，“你既然帮我得到了这张该死的铁椅子，就该帮我保住它吧。我们注定是要并肩治理国家的。倘若莱安娜还活着，我们现在就该是连姻手足，名副其实的兄弟了。呵呵，好在现在也不迟，我有个儿子，你有个女儿，我家小乔和你的珊莎会把两家结合在一起，就好像当年的莱安娜和我。”
This offer did surprise him. “Sansa is only eleven.”
这个提议却真吓了奈德一跳：“可珊莎才十一岁。”
Robert waved an impatient hand. “Old enough for betrothal. The marriage can wait a few years.” The king smiled. “Now stand up and say yes, curse you.”
劳勃不耐烦地挥挥手：“已经大到可以订婚啦，结婚等过几年再说。”国王微笑，“你这浑球，还不快站起来说好。”
“Nothing would give me greater pleasure, Your Grace,” Ned answered. He hesitated. “These honors are all so unexpected. May I have some time to consider? I need to tell my wife …”
“陛下，这是至高无上的荣耀与喜乐。”奈德回答，接着他露出迟疑，“可也太让我措手不及，能否给我点时间考虑？我要告诉我妻子……”
“Yes, yes, of course, tell Catelyn, sleep on it if you must.” The king reached down, clasped Ned by the hand, and pulled him roughly to his feet. “Just don’t keep me waiting too long. I am not the most patient of men.”
“好，好，当然没问题，去跟凯特琳说罢，好好想清楚。”国王伸出手，拍了拍奈德的手，然后把他拉起来。“别教我等太久就是，你也知道我没什么耐性。”
For a moment Eddard Stark was filled with a terrible sense of foreboding. This was his place, here in the north. He looked at the stone figures all around them, breathed deep in the chill silence of the crypt. He could feel the eyes of the dead. They were all listening, he knew. And winter was coming.
一时之间，艾德·史塔克心中充满了一种山雨欲来的恐惧，毕竟寒冷的北国才是真正属于他的故乡。他看看四周石像，吸了口墓窖的冰冷空气。他隐约可以感觉得出身旁历代先祖的目光，他知道他们正侧耳倾听，他知道凛冬将至。
