*EDDARD
第四十章 艾德
H e dreamt an old dream, of three knights in white cloaks, and a tower long fallen, and Lyanna in her bed of blood.
他再度梦见那三位雪白披风的骑士，那座倾塌已久的塔楼，以及躺卧血床的莱安娜。
In the dream his friends rode with him, as they had in life. Proud Martyn Cassel, Jory’s father; faithful Theo Wull; Ethan Glover, who had been Brandon’s squire; Ser Mark Ryswell, soft of speech and gentle of heart; the crannogman, Howland Reed; Lord Dustin on his great red stallion. Ned had known their faces as well as he knew his own once, but the years leech at a man’s memories, even those he has vowed never to forget. In the dream they were only shadows, grey wraiths on horses made of mist.
在梦中他与从前的战友并肩而行：骄傲的马丁·凯索、乔里的父亲，忠心耿耿的席奥·渥尔本为布兰登侍从的伊森·葛洛佛，还有轻声细语、心地善良的马克·莱斯威尔爵士，泽地人霍兰·黎德，以及骑着红色骏马的达斯丁伯爵。他们的面容，对奈德来说，曾如自己的脸庞一般熟悉，但岁月仿如水蛭，渐渐吸走了人们的记忆，即使是他一度发誓绝不忘记的部分也不例外。在梦里他们只剩幻影，宛如灰色的幽灵，骑在浓雾聚成的马上。
They were seven, facing three. In the dream as it had been in life. Yet these were no ordinary three. They waited before the round tower, the red mountains of Dorne at their backs, their white cloaks blowing in the wind. And these were no shadows; their faces burned clear, even now. Ser Arthur Dayne, the Sword of the Morning, had a sad smile on his lips. The hilt of the greatsword Dawn poked up over his right shoulder. Ser Oswell Whent was on one knee, sharpening his blade with a whetstone. Across his white-enameled helm, the black bat of his House spread its wings. Between them stood fierce old Ser Gerold Hightower, the White Bull, Lord Commander of the Kingsguard.
他们一行七人，对方则是三个。梦中如此，当年亦然。但这三人绝非平庸之辈。他们静待于圆形的高塔前，身后是多恩的赤红峰峦，肩上的雪白披风在风中飘荡。而这三人并非幻影，他们的面容深深烙印，至今依旧清晰。“拂晓神剑”亚瑟·戴恩爵士嘴角挂着一抹哀伤的微笑，巨剑“黎明”斜出右肩。奥斯威尔·河安爵士单膝跪地，正拿着磨刀石霍霍磨剑。他那顶白色瓷釉的头盔上，有着象征家徽的展翅黑蝙蝠。站在两人之间的是年迈的御林铁卫队长杰洛·海塔尔爵士，外号“白牛”。
“I looked for you on the Trident,” Ned said to them.
“我在三叉戟河上没见到你们。”奈德对他们说。
“We were not there,” Ser Gerold answered.
“我们不在那里。”杰洛爵士回答。
“Woe to the Usurper if we had been,” said Ser Oswell.
“我们在的话，篡夺者就要倒霉了。”奥斯威尔爵士道。
“When King’s Landing fell, Ser Jaime slew your king with a golden sword, and I wondered where you were.”
“君临城陷之时，詹姆爵士用他的黄金宝剑杀了你们的国王，你们也没出现。”
“Far away,” Ser Gerold said, “or Aerys would yet sit the Iron Throne, and our false brother would burn in seven hells.”
“我们身在远方。”杰洛爵士道，“否则伊里斯还会好端端地坐在铁王座上，而我们虚伪的弟兄则会下七层地狱。”
“I came down on Storm’s End to lift the siege,” Ned told them, “and the Lords Tyrell and Redwyne dipped their banners, and all their knights bent the knee to pledge us fealty. I was certain you would be among them.”
“我解了风息堡之围，”奈德告诉他们，“提利尔和雷德温大人俯首称臣，他们麾下的骑士也都下跪效忠。我本以为你们一定会在其中。”
“Our knees do not bend easily,” said Ser Arthur Dayne.
“我们不轻易下跪。”亚瑟·戴恩爵士道。
“Ser Willem Darry is fled to Dragonstone, with your queen and Prince Viserys. I thought you might have sailed with him.”
“威廉·戴瑞爵士带着你们的王后和韦赛里斯王子，往龙石岛逃去。我猜想你们可能也在船上。”
“Ser Willem is a good man and true,” said Ser Oswell.
“威廉爵士忠勇可嘉。”奥斯威尔爵士说。
“But not of the Kingsguard,” Ser Gerold pointed out. “The Kingsguard does not flee.”
“但他并非御林铁卫，”杰洛爵士指出，“御林铁卫绝不临危脱逃。”
“Then or now,” said Ser Arthur. He donned his helm.
“过去如此，现在亦然。”亚瑟爵士说着戴上头盔。
“We swore a vow,” explained old Ser Gerold.
“我们发过誓。”老杰洛爵士解释。
Ned’s wraiths moved up beside him, with shadow swords in hand. They were seven against three.
奈德的幽灵们与他并肩上前，手握影子宝剑。以七对三。
“And now it begins,” said Ser Arthur Dayne, the Sword of the Morning. He unsheathed Dawn and held it with both hands. The blade was pale as milkglass, alive with light.
“一切就从这里开始吧。”拂晓神剑亚瑟·戴恩爵士道。他抽出黎明，双手高举，剑身苍白好似乳白琉璃，在光线照耀下宛如蕴涵生命。
“No,” Ned said with sadness in his voice. “Now it ends.” As they came together in a rush of steel and shadow, he could hear Lyanna screaming. “Eddard!” she called. A storm of rose petals blew across a blood-streaked sky, as blue as the eyes of death.
“不对，”奈德哀伤地说，“一切将在这里结束。”当钢铁与幻影冲杀成一团，他听见了莱安娜的尖叫。“艾德！”她喊。一阵玫瑰花瓣的暴风，吹过染血长天，天空蓝得像死亡之眼。
“Lord Eddard,” Lyanna called again.
“艾德大人。”莱安娜又叫。
“I promise,” he whispered. “Lya, I promise …”
“我保证，”他轻声说，“莱安，我保证……”
“Lord Eddard,” a man echoed from the dark.
“艾德大人。”有人从暗处也说了这句话。
Groaning, Eddard Stark opened his eyes. Moonlight streamed through the tall windows of the Tower of the Hand.
艾德·史塔克呻吟着睁开眼睛。月光从首相塔的高窗透进来。
“Lord Eddard?” A shadow stood over the bed.
“艾德大人？”床边站了个影子。
“How … how long?” The sheets were tangled, his leg splinted and plastered. A dull throb of pain shot up his side.
“多……多久了？”床单乱成一团，他的腿用夹板固定，打上了石膏，隐隐抽痛。
“Six days and seven nights.” The voice was Vayon Poole’s. The steward held a cup to Ned’s lips. “Drink, my lord.”
“六天七夜。”那是维扬·普尔的声音。总管拿起杯子送到奈德唇边。“老爷，喝吧。”
“What …?”
“这是……？”
“Only water. Maester Pycelle said you would be thirsty.”
“只是开水而已。派席尔大学士说您醒来会渴。”
Ned drank. His lips were parched and cracked. The water tasted sweet as honey.
于是奈德喝了。他的嘴唇干裂，开水如同蜂蜜般甜美。
“The king left orders,” Vayon Poole told him when the cup was empty. “He would speak with you, my lord.”
“国王陛下有令，”杯子见底后，维扬·普尔告诉他。“老爷，他要跟您谈谈。”
“On the morrow,” Ned said. “When I am stronger.” He could not face Robert now. The dream had left him weak as a kitten.
“明天再说，”奈德道，“等我体力好点再说。”这会儿他无法面对劳勃。刚才那个梦吸走了他仅存的力量，让他软弱得像只小猫。
“My lord,” Poole said, “he commanded us to send you to him the moment you opened your eyes.” The steward busied himself lighting a bedside candle.
“老爷，”普尔说，“陛下他要我们等您一睁眼，就带您去见他。”总管点起床边的蜡烛。
Ned cursed softly. Robert was never known for his patience. “Tell him I’m too weak to come to him. If he wishes to speak with me, I should be pleased to receive him here. I hope you wake him from a sound sleep. And summon …” He was about to say Jory when he remembered. “Summon the captain of my guard.”
奈德轻声咒骂。劳勃向来很没耐性。“跟他说我还太虚弱，没办法过去。如果他坚持要跟我谈谈，我很愿意在床上接待他。我希望你别把他从美梦中吵醒。顺便……”他正要说“乔里”，却想了起来。“把我的侍卫队长找来。”
Alyn stepped into the bedchamber a few moments after the steward had taken his leave. “My lord.”
总管离开后没几分钟，埃林走进他的卧房。“大人。”
“Poole tells me it has been six days,” Ned said. “I must know how things stand.”
“普尔说我睡了六天。”奈德道，“我要知道现在局势如何。”
“The Kingslayer is fled the city,” Alyn told him. “The talk is he’s ridden back to Casterly Rock to join his father. The story of how Lady Catelyn took the Imp is on every lip. I have put on extra guards, if it please you.”
“弑君者跑了。”埃林告诉他，“传说是逃回凯岩城和他父亲会合。凯特琳夫人逮捕小恶魔的事，已经传遍大街小巷，所以我加派了守卫，希望您不介意。”
“It does,” Ned assured him. “My daughters?”
“你做得很好。”奈德赞许道。“我的女儿们呢？”
“They have been with you every day, my lord. Sansa prays quietly, but Arya …” He hesitated. “She has not said a word since they brought you back. She is a fierce little thing, my lord. I have never seen such anger in a girl.”
“大人，她们每天都陪着您。珊莎静静地为您祷告，可艾莉亚……”他迟疑了一下。“自他们把您带回来后，她就没说过半个字。大人，她性子很烈，我从没见哪个小女孩这么生气过。”
“Whatever happens,” Ned said, “I want my daughters kept safe. I fear this is only the beginning.”
“无论如何，”奈德道，“我希望我女儿们平安无事。恐怕麻烦才刚开始。”
“No harm will come to them, Lord Eddard,” Alyn said. “I stake my life on that.”
“艾德大人，她们不会有事的。”埃林道，“我拿性命担保。”
“Jory and the others …”
“乔里他们……”
“I gave them over to the silent sisters, to be sent north to Winterfell. Jory would want to lie beside his grandfather.”
“我把他们交给了静默修女会的姐妹，准备送回临冬城去。应该让乔里葬在他祖父身边。”
It would have to be his grandfather, for Jory’s father was buried far to the south. Martyn Cassel had perished with the rest. Ned had pulled the tower down afterward, and used its bloody stones to build eight cairns upon the ridge. It was said that Rhaegar had named that place the tower of joy, but for Ned it was a bitter memory. They had been seven against three, yet only two had lived to ride away; Eddard Stark himself and the little crannogman, Howland Reed. He did not think it omened well that he should dream that dream again after so many years.
他只能与祖父葬在一块，因为乔里的父亲葬在遥远的南方。马丁·凯索和其他人一样命丧南疆，战后奈德拆掉高塔，用其血色石砖在山脊上筑起八座石冢。据说雷加将它命名为极乐塔，但对奈德而言，那里却充满了痛苦的回忆。他们以七对三，却只有艾德·史塔克他自己，和小个子的泽地人霍兰·黎德两人生还。多年以来，这个梦反复出现，实在不是什么好兆头。
“You’ve done well, Alyn,” Ned was saying when Vayon Poole returned. The steward bowed low. “His Grace is without, my lord, and the queen with him.”
“埃林，你做得很好。”奈德正说着，维扬·普尔又回来了。总管深深一鞠躬，“老爷，国王陛下在外面，王后也跟他一起。”
Ned pushed himself up higher, wincing as his leg trembled with pain. He had not expected Cersei to come. It did not bode well that she had. “Send them in, and leave us. What we have to say should not go beyond these walls.” Poole withdrew quietly.
奈德撑着坐起，断腿痛得他咬紧牙关。他没想到瑟曦会来，这也不是好兆头。“请他们进来，然后你们下去罢。我们的谈话内容不能外传。”普尔静静地离开。
Robert had taken time to dress. He wore a black velvet doublet with the crowned stag of Baratheon worked upon the breast in golden thread, and a golden mantle with a cloak of black and gold squares. A flagon of wine was in his hand, his face already flushed from drink. Cersei Lannister entered behind him, a jeweled tiara in her hair.
劳勃还花了点心思打扮。他穿着黑天鹅绒上衣，胸前用金线绣着拜拉席恩家族的宝冠雄鹿，外罩黑金格子披风。他手里拿了瓶葡萄酒，喝得满脸通红。瑟曦·兰尼斯特跟在他身后，头上带着珠宝王冠。
“Your Grace,” Ned said. “Your pardons. I cannot rise.”
“陛下，”奈德道，“请您原谅，恕我无法起身。”
“No matter,” the king said gruffly. “Some wine? From the Arbor. A good vintage.”
“没关系。”国王粗声道，“要不要喝两口？青亭岛的好东西。”
“A small cup,” Ned said. “My head is still heavy from the milk of the poppy.”
“一小杯就好，”奈德说，“我喝了罂粟花奶，头还昏昏沉沉的。”
“A man in your place should count himself fortunate that his head is still on his shoulders,” the queen declared.
“还保得住脑袋，已经算你走运。”王后表示。
“Quiet, woman,” Robert snapped. He brought Ned a cup of wine. “Does the leg still pain you?”
“臭女人，给我安静点。”国王斥道。他端给奈德一杯酒。“脚还痛吗？”
“Some,” Ned said. His head was swimming, but it would not do to admit to weakness in front of the queen.
“还有一点。”奈德说。他虽然头晕目眩，却不愿在王后面前自承虚弱。
“Pycelle swears it will heal clean,” Robert frowned. “I take it you know what Catelyn has done?”
“派席尔保证痊愈以后不会留下疤痕，”劳勃皱眉道，“我想你知道凯特琳干了什么好事吧？”
“I do.” Ned took a small swallow of wine. “My lady wife is blameless, Your Grace. All she did she did at my command.”
“我知道。”奈德啜了一小口酒。“我夫人没有错，陛下。都是我的意思。”
“I am not pleased, Ned,” Robert grumbled.
“奈德，我很不高兴。”劳勃咕哝道。
“By what right do you dare lay hands on my blood?” Cersei demanded. “Who do you think you are?”
“你凭什么对我家人下手？”瑟曦质问，“你以为你什么东西？”
“The Hand of the King,” Ned told her with icy courtesy. “Charged by your own lord husband to keep the king’s peace and enforce the king’s justice.”
“我是御前首相。”奈德有礼但冰冷地回敬，“奉了你丈夫的指令，以国王之名维护和平和公理正义。”
“You were the Hand,” Cersei began, “but now—”
“你曾经是首相，”瑟曦不依不饶，“如今——”
“Silence!” the king roared. “You asked him a question and he answered it.” Cersei subsided, cold with anger, and Robert turned back to Ned. “Keep the king’s peace, you say. Is this how you keep my peace, Ned? Seven men are dead …”
“安静！”国王咆哮道，“你问他问题，他也回答了你。”瑟曦冷冷地退开，满脸怒容。劳勃又转向奈德。“奈德，你说以国王之名维护和平，请问这就是你维护和平的方式么？总共死了七个人……”
“Eight,” the queen corrected. “Tregar died this morning, of the blow Lord Stark gave him.”
“八个，”王后纠正他，“崔格今早上死了，死于史塔克大人那一剑。”
“Abductions on the kingsroad and drunken slaughter in my streets,” the king said. “I will not have it, Ned.”
“先是在国王大道上公然绑架，然后又在城里面喝酒杀人，”国王道，“奈德，我不会容许这种事的。”
“Catelyn had good reason for taking the Imp—”
“凯特琳有充分的理由去抓小恶魔——”
“I said, I will not have it! To hell with her reasons. You will command her to release the dwarf at once, and you will make your peace with Jaime.”
“我说我不容许这种事发生！管她什么理由。我要你命令她立刻释放侏儒，然后跟詹姆和好。”
“Three of my men were butchered before my eyes, because Jaime Lannister wished to chasten me. Am I to forget that?”
“詹姆只因为想‘教训我’，就当着我的面屠杀了我三个部下，而你却叫我当这事没发生过？”
“My brother was not the cause of this quarrel,” Cersei told the king. “Lord Stark was returning drunk from a brothel. His men attacked Jaime and his guards, even as his wife attacked Tyrion on the kingsroad.”
“这场争端可不是我弟弟挑起的，”瑟曦告诉国王，“当时史塔克大人喝醉了酒，刚从妓院里出来。他手下的人攻击詹姆和他的卫士，就像他太太在国王大道上攻击提利昂一样。”
“You know me better than that, Robert,” Ned said. “Ask Lord Baelish if you doubt me. He was there.”
“劳勃，事实是否如此你很清楚。”奈德道，“你可以问问贝里席大人，当时他在现场。”
“I’ve talked to Littlefinger,” Robert said. “He claims he rode off to bring the gold cloaks before the fighting began, but he admits you were returning from some whorehouse.”
“我跟小指头谈过了，”劳勃道，“他说他急忙去找都城守卫队时，你们还没开打，不过他承认你当时的确是从某家妓院回来。”
“Some whorehouse? Damn your eyes, Robert, I went there to have a look at your daughter! Her mother has named her Barra. She looks like that first girl you fathered, when we were boys together in the Vale.” He watched the queen as he spoke; her face was a mask, still and pale, betraying nothing.
“某家妓院？劳勃，你是瞎了眼不成？我到那儿是去看你女儿！她妈给她取了个名字叫芭拉，长得很像我们住在峡谷、都还是小男孩时你那个女儿，你的第一个女儿。”他边说边看王后，可她像是戴着面具，苍白而冷静，不露出任何情绪。
Robert flushed. “Barra,” he grumbled. “Is that supposed to please me? Damn the girl. I thought she had more sense.”
劳勃红了脸。“芭拉，”他喃喃说，“想哄我高兴吗？这小女子真该死，怎么一点常识都没有。”
“She cannot be more than fifteen, and a whore, and you thought she had sense?” Ned said, incredulous. His leg was beginning to pain him sorely. It was hard to keep his temper. “The fool child is in love with you, Robert.”
“她连十五岁都不到，就得出卖肉体，你还期望她有常识？”奈德难以置信地说。他的腿痛得厉害，使他按捺不住怒气。“劳勃，那傻孩子疯狂地爱着你，你知道吗？”
The king glanced at Cersei. “This is no fit subject for the queen’s ears.”
国王瞄了瑟曦一眼。“这些事给王后听见不好。”
“Her Grace will have no liking for anything I have to say,” Ned replied. “I am told the Kingslayer has fled the city. Give me leave to bring him back to justice.”
“只怕不管我说什么，王后陛下都不会爱听。”奈德答道，“我听说弑君者逃出城去了。请你允许我把他抓回来接受法律制裁。”
The king swirled the wine in his cup, brooding. He took a swallow. “No,” he said. “I want no more of this. Jaime slew three of your men, and you five of his. Now it ends.”
国王晃着杯中酒，沉思半晌，最后灌了一大口。“不行，”他说，“这样下去没完没了。詹姆杀了你三个人，你也杀了他五个，算扯平了。”
“Is that your notion of justice?” Ned flared. “If so, I am pleased that I am no longer your Hand.”
“这就是你所谓的正义吗？”奈德怒道，“如果是的话，那我真庆幸没继续当你的首相。”
The queen looked to her husband. “If any man had dared speak to a Targaryen as he has spoken to you—”
王后看看她丈夫。“以前要是有人敢用这种口气对坦格利安家的人说话——”
“Do you take me for Aerys?” Robert interrupted.
“你当我是伊里斯吗？”劳勃打断她的话。
“I took you for a king . Jaime and Tyrion are your own brothers, by all the laws of marriage and the bonds we share. The Starks have driven off the one and seized the other. This man dishonors you with every breath he takes, and yet you stand there meekly, asking if his leg pains him and would he like some wine.”
“我当你是一国之君。论法律论姻亲，詹姆和提利昂都算是你兄弟，如今史塔克家的人赶走一个又抓了另一个，而这个人说的每一句话都在羞辱你，你却只会乖乖站在旁边，一会儿问他腿痛不痛，一会儿问他要不要喝酒。”
Robert’s face was dark with anger. “How many times must I tell you to hold your tongue, woman?”
劳勃脸色阴沉，满面怒容。“臭女人，你要我说几次才会闭嘴？”
Cersei’s face was a study in contempt. “What a jape the gods have made of us two,” she said. “By all rights, you ought to be in skirts and me in mail.”
瑟曦的神情轻蔑得无以复加。“天上诸神还真开了我俩一个大玩笑，”她说，“你应该穿裙子当女人，像个男人披挂上阵的该是我。”
Purple with rage, the king lashed out, a vicious backhand blow to the side of the head. She stumbled against the table and fell hard, yet Cersei Lannister did not cry out. Her slender fingers brushed her cheek, where the pale smooth skin was already reddening. On the morrow the bruise would cover half her face. “I shall wear this as a badge of honor,” she announced.
国王气得脸色发紫，伸手就是狠狠一拳，把她打得踉跄着撞上桌子，重重跌倒在地。瑟曦·兰尼斯特没吭半声，她伸出纤细的手指抚着脸，面颊光滑的雪白肌肤已经开始泛红，等到明天，半边脸就会肿起来。“我会把这当成荣誉的奖章。”她宣示。
“Wear it in silence, or I’ll honor you again,” Robert vowed. He shouted for a guard. Ser Meryn Trant stepped into the room, tall and somber in his white armor. “The queen is tired. See her to her bedchamber.” The knight helped Cersei to her feet and led her out without a word.
“那就给我安静地戴好，否则我让你更光荣。”劳勃保证。他大喊来人，穿着白色铠甲，高大阴沉的马林·特兰爵士走进屋内。“王后累了。送她回房。”骑士扶起瑟曦，一言不发地领她出去了。
Robert reached for the flagon and refilled his cup. “You see what she does to me, Ned.” The king seated himself, cradling his wine cup. “My loving wife. The mother of my children.” The rage was gone from him now; in his eyes Ned saw something sad and scared. “I should not have hit her. That was not … that was not kingly.” He stared down at his hands, as if he did not quite know what they were. “I was always strong … no one could stand before me, no one. How do you fight someone if you can’t hit them?” Confused, the king shook his head. “Rhaegar … Rhaegar won , damn him. I killed him, Ned, I drove the spike right through that black armor into his black heart, and he died at my feet. They made up songs about it. Yet somehow he still won. He has Lyanna now, and I have her.” The king drained his cup.
劳勃又拿起酒瓶，为自己斟满。“奈德，你也看到她是如何待我的了。”国王坐下来，抚着酒杯。“这就是我亲爱的妻子，我孩子的母亲。”他怒气已消，此刻奈德在他眼里所见只有哀伤和恐惧。“我不该打她的。这实在不是……实在不是国王该有的举动。”他低头盯着自己的手，仿佛不太明白那是什么东西。“我的力气向来很大……没人能打赢我，没有人。可万一你碰不到他，这场架又该怎么打？”国王困惑地摇摇头。“雷加……雷加他赢了，挨千刀的。奈德，我杀了他，我的战锤狠狠凿穿他那件黑铠甲，刺进他那颗黑心，教他当场死在我脚下。后人为这件事称颂不已。可他还是赢了。如今他拥有莱安娜，而我得到的却是她。”国王一饮而尽。
“Your Grace,” Ned Stark said, “we must talk …”
“陛下，”奈德·史塔克道，“我有事要跟您谈……”
Robert pressed his fingertips against his temples. “I am sick unto death of talk. On the morrow I’m going to the kingswood to hunt. Whatever you have to say can wait until I return.”
劳勃伸出手指按住太阳穴。“我已经谈到反胃了。明天我要去御林打猎，你等我回来再说罢。”
“If the gods are good, I shall not be here on your return. You commanded me to return to Winterfell, remember?”
“若是诸神眷顾，等您回来我就不在了。您命令我返回临冬城，记得吗？”
Robert stood up, grasping one of the bedposts to steady himself. “The gods are seldom good, Ned. Here, this is yours.” He pulled the heavy silver hand clasp from a pocket in the lining of his cloak and tossed it on the bed. “Like it or not, you are my Hand, damn you. I forbid you to leave.”
劳勃站起来，握着床柱稳住身子。“奈德，诸神很少眷顾世人的。拿去罢，这是你的东西。”他从斗篷内袋里拿出沉重的手形银徽章，丢在床上。“管你喜不喜欢，总之你他妈是我的首相。我不准你走。”
Ned picked up the silver clasp. He was being given no choice, it seemed. His leg throbbed, and he felt as helpless as a child. “The Targaryen girl—”
奈德拾起银胸针。看来他别无选择。他脚伤抽痛，觉得自己无助得像个孩子。“坦格利安家那女孩——”
The king groaned. “Seven hells, don’t start with her again. That’s done, I’ll hear no more of it.”
国王一声呻吟，“七层地狱啊，你还提她干嘛？那件事算完了，我不想再谈。”
“Why would you want me as your Hand, if you refuse to listen to my counsel?”
“若你不愿听我忠告，还要我这个首相做什么？”
“Why?” Robert laughed. “Why not? Someone has to rule this damnable kingdom. Put on the badge, Ned. It suits you. And if you ever throw it in my face again, I swear to you, I’ll pin the damned thing on Jaime Lannister.”
“做什么？”劳勃大笑，“这烂国家总得有人管。奈德，把徽章戴起来。我跟你发誓，你要是敢再丢还给我，我就亲自把这烂东西配在詹姆·兰尼斯特身上。”
