*PROLOGUE
第一章 序曲
“We should start back,” Gared urged as the woods began to grow dark around them.“The wildlings are dead.”
“既然野人①已经死了，”眼看周围的树林逐渐黯淡，盖瑞不禁催促，“咱们回头吧。”
“Do the dead frighten you?” Ser Waymar Royce asked with just the hint of a smile.
“死人吓着你了吗？”威玛·罗伊斯爵士带着轻浅的笑意问。
Gared did not rise to the bait. He was an old man, past fifty, and he had seen the lordlings come and go. “Dead is dead,” he said. “We have no business with the dead.”
盖瑞并未中激将之计，年过五十的他也算得上是个老人，这辈子看过太多贵族子弟来来去去。“死了就是死了，”他说，“咱们何必追寻死人。”
“Are they dead?” Royce asked softly. “What proof have we?”
“你能确定他们真死了？”罗伊斯轻声问，“证据何在？”
“Will saw them,” Gared said. “If he says they are dead, that’s proof enough for me.”
“威尔看到了，”盖瑞道，“我相信他说的话。”
Will had known they would drag him into the quarrel sooner or later. He wished it had been later rather than sooner. “My mother told me that dead men sing no songs,” he put in.
威尔料到他们早晚会把自己卷入这场争执，只是没想到这么快。“我娘说过，死人没戏可唱。”他插嘴道。
“My wet nurse said the same thing, Will,” Royce replied. “Never believe anything you hear at a woman’s tit. There are things to be learned even from the dead.” His voice echoed, too loud in the twilit forest.
“威尔，我奶妈也说过这话，”罗伊斯回答：“千万别相信你在女人怀里听到的东西。就算人是死了，也能让我们了解很多东西。”他的余音在暮色昏暝的森林里回荡，似乎吵闹了点。
“We have a long ride before us,” Gared pointed out. “Eight days, maybe nine. And night is falling.”
“回去的路还长着呢，”盖瑞指出，“少不了走个八九天，况且天色渐渐暗下来了。”
Ser Waymar Royce glanced at the sky with disinterest. “It does that every day about this time. Are you unmanned by the dark, Gared?”
威玛·罗伊斯爵士意兴阑珊地扫视天际。“每天这时候不都如此？盖瑞，你该不会怕黑吧？”
Will could see the tightness around Gared’s mouth, the barely suppressed anger in his eyes under the thick black hood of his cloak. Gared had spent forty years in the Night’s Watch, man and boy, and he was not accustomed to being made light of. Yet it was more than that. Under the wounded pride, Will could sense something else in the older man. You could taste it; a nervous tension that came perilous close to fear.
威尔看见盖瑞紧抿的嘴唇，以及他厚重黑斗篷下强自遏抑的怒火。盖瑞当了四十年的守夜人②，这种资历可不是随便让人寻开心的。但盖瑞不仅是愤怒，在他受伤的自尊底下，威尔隐约察觉到某种潜藏的不安，一种近似于畏惧的紧张情绪。
Will shared his unease. He had been four years on the Wall. The first time he had been sent beyond, all the old stories had come rushing back, and his bowels had turned to water. He had laughed about it afterward. He was a veteran of a hundred rangings by now, and the endless dark wilderness that the southron called the haunted forest had no more terrors for him.
威尔深有同感。他戍守长城不过四年，当初首次越墙北进，所有的传说故事突然都涌上心头，把他吓得四肢发软，事后想起难免莞尔。如今他已是拥有百余次巡逻经验的老手，眼前这片南方人称作鬼影森林的广袤黑荒，他早已无所畏惧。
Until tonight. Something was different tonight. There was an edge to this darkness that made his hackles rise. Nine days they had been riding, north and northwest and then north again, farther and farther from the Wall, hard on the track of a band of Wildling raiders. Each day had been worse than the day that had come before it. Today was the worst of all. A cold wind was blowing out of the north, and it made the trees rustle like living things. All day, Will had felt as though something were watching him, something cold and implacable that loved him not. Gared had felt it too. Will wanted nothing so much as to ride hellbent for the safety of the Wall, but that was not a feeling to share with your commander.
然而今晚是个例外，迥异往昔，四方暗幕中有种莫可名状、让他汗毛竖立的惊悚。他们轻骑北出长城，中途转向西北，随即又向北，九天来昼夜加急、不断推进，紧咬一队土匪的足迹。环境日益恶化，今天已降到谷底。阴森北风吹得树影幢幢，宛如狰狞活物，威尔整天都觉得自己受到一种冰冷且对他毫无好感的莫名之物监视，盖瑞也感觉出了。此刻威尔心中只想掉转马头，没命似地逃回长城。但这却是万万不能在长官面前说出的念头。
Especially not a commander like this one.
尤其是这样的长官。
Ser Waymar Royce was the youngest son of an ancient house with too many heirs. He was a handsome youth of eighteen, grey-eyed and graceful and slender as a knife. Mounted on his huge black destrier, the knight towered above Will and Gared on their smaller garrons. He wore black leather boots, black woolen pants, black moleskin gloves, and a fine supple coat of gleaming black ringmail over layers of black wool and boiled leather. Ser Waymar had been a Sworn Brother of the Night’s Watch for less than half a year, but no one could say he had not prepared for his vocation. At least insofar as his wardrobe was concerned.
威玛·罗伊斯爵士出身贵族世家，在儿孙满堂的家里排行老幺。他是个俊美的十八岁青年，有双灰色眸子，举止优雅，瘦得像把尖刀。骑在他那匹健壮的黑色战马上，比骑着矮小犁马的威尔和盖瑞高出许多。他穿着黑色皮靴，黑色羊毛裤，戴着黑色鼹鼠皮手套，黑色羊毛衫外套硬皮甲，又罩了一件闪闪发光的黑色环甲。威玛爵士宣誓成为守夜人尚不满半年，但他绝非空手而来，最起码行头一件不少。
His cloak was his crowning glory; sable, thick and black and soft as sin. “Bet he killed them all himself, he did,” Gared told the barracks over wine, “twisted their little heads off, our mighty warrior.” They had all shared the laugh.
而他身上最耀眼的行头，自然便是那件既厚实、又柔软惊人的黑色貂皮斗篷。“我敢打赌，那堆黑貂一定是他亲手杀的，”盖瑞在军营里喝酒时对兄弟们说：“我们伟大的战士哦，把它们的小头一颗颗扭断啦。”当时便引得众人哄笑一团。
It is hard to take orders from a man you laughed at in your cups, Will reflected as he sat shivering atop his garron. Gared must have felt the same.
假如你的长官是大伙儿饮酒作乐时的嘲笑对象，你怎么去尊敬他呢？威尔骑在马上，不禁如此思量。想必盖瑞也深有同感。
“Mormont said as we should track them, and we did,” Gared said. “They’re dead. They shan’t trouble us no more. There’s hard riding before us. I don’t like this weather. If it snows, we could be a fortnight getting back, and snow’s the best we can hope for. Ever seen an ice storm, my lord?”
“莫尔蒙叫我们追查野人行踪，我们照办了，”盖瑞道：“现在他们死去，再也不会来骚扰我们。而眼前还有好长一段路等着我们。我实在不喜欢这种天气，要是下雪，我们得花两个星期才能回去。其实下雪还算不上什么，大人，您可见过冰风暴肆虐的景象？”
The lordling seemed not to hear him. He studied the deepening twilight in that half-bored, half-distracted way he had. Will had ridden with the knight long enough to understand that it was best not to interrupt him when he looked like that. “Tell me again what you saw, Will. All the details. Leave nothing out.”
小少爷似乎没听见这番话。他用他特有的那种缺乏兴趣、漫不经心的方式审视着渐暗的暮色。威尔跟随他已有些时日，知道这种时候最好不要打断他。“威尔，再跟我说一遍你看到了些什么。仔细讲来，别漏掉任何细节。”
Will had been a hunter before he joined the Night’s Watch. Well, a poacher in truth. Mallister freeriders had caught him red-handed in the Mallisters’ own woods, skinning one of the Mallisters’ own bucks, and it had been a choice of putting on the black or losing a hand. No one could move through the woods as silent as Will, and it had not taken the black brothers long to discover his talent.
在成为守夜人以前，威尔原本靠打猎为生。说难听点，其实就是偷猎者。当年他在梅利斯特家族的森林里偷猎公鹿，正忙着剥鹿皮，弄得一手血腥的时候，被受雇于梅利斯特家的自由骑手③逮个正着。他若不选择加入黑衫军，就只有单手被砍一途。威尔潜行的本事是一等一的，在森林里无声潜行等闲难及，黑衫军的弟兄们果然很快也就发现了他的长处。
“The camp is two miles farther on, over that ridge, hard beside a stream,” Will said. “I got close as I dared. There’s eight of them, men and women both. No children I could see. They put up a lean-to against the rock. The snow’s pretty well covered it now, but I could still make it out. No fire burning, but the firepit was still plain as day. No one moving. I watched a long time. No living man ever lay so still.”
“营地在两里之外，翻过山脊，紧邻着一条溪。”威尔答道，“我已经靠得很近了。总共有八个人，男女都有，但没看见小孩。他们背靠着大石头，虽然雪几乎把营地整个盖住，但我还是分辨得出来。没有营火，只有火堆的余烬比较明显。他们一动不动，我仔细看了好长时间，活人绝不会躺得这么安静。”
“Did you see any blood?”
“你发现血迹了吗？”
“Well, no,” Will admitted.
“嗯，没有。”威尔坦承。
“Did you see any weapons?”
“你看见任何武器了吗？”
“Some swords, a few bows. One man had an axe. Heavy-looking, double-bladed, a cruel piece of iron. It was on the ground beside him, right by his hand.”
“几支剑、两三把弓，还有个家伙带了一柄斧头。铁打的双刃斧，似乎挺沉的，摆在他右手边的地上。”
“Did you make note of the position of the bodies?”
“你记得他们躺着的相对位置吗？”
Will shrugged. “A couple are sitting up against the rock. Most of them on the ground. Fallen, like.”
威尔耸耸肩。“两三个靠着石头，大部分躺在地上，像是被打死的。”
“Or sleeping,” Royce suggested.
“也可能在睡觉。”罗伊斯提出异议。
“Fallen,” Will insisted. “There’s one woman up an ironwood, half-hid in the branches. A far-eyes.” He smiled thinly. “I took care she never saw me. When I got closer, I saw that she wasn’t moving neither.” Despite himself, he shivered.
“肯定是被打死的，”威尔坚持己见，“因为有个女的爬在铁树上，藏在枝头，应该是个斥候。”他浅浅一笑。“我很小心，没让她见着。但等我靠近，却发现她根本毫无动静。”说到这儿他不禁一阵颤抖。
“You have a chill?” Royce asked.
“你受寒了？”罗伊斯问。
“Some,” Will muttered. “The wind, m’lord.”
“有点罢，”威尔喃喃道，“大人，是风的关系啊。”
The young knight turned back to his grizzled man-at-arms. Frost-fallen leaves whispered past them, and Royce’s destrier moved restlessly. “What do you think might have killed these men, Gared?” Ser Waymar asked casually. He adjusted the drape of his long sable cloak.
年轻骑士转头面对灰发老兵。结霜的落叶在他们耳边低语飘零，罗伊斯的战马局促不安。“盖瑞，你觉得是谁杀了这些人？”威玛爵士随口问，顺手整了整貂皮长袍的褶裥。
“It was the cold,” Gared said with iron certainty. “I saw men freeze last winter, and the one before, when I was half a boy. Everyone talks about snows forty foot deep, and how the ice wind comes howling out of the north, but the real enemy is the cold. It steals up on you quieter than Will, and at first you shiver and your teeth chatter and you stamp your feet and dream of mulled wine and nice hot fires. It burns, it does. Nothing burns like the cold. But only for a while. Then it gets inside you and starts to fill you up, and after a while you don’t have the strength to fight it. It’s easier just to sit down or go to sleep. They say you don’t feel any pain toward the end. First you go weak and drowsy, and everything starts to fade, and then it’s like sinking into a sea of warm milk. Peaceful, like.”
“是这该死的天气，”盖瑞斩钉截铁地说，“上个严冬④，我亲眼见人活活冻死，再之前那次也看过，当时我还是个孩子。人人都说当时积雪深达四十尺，北风冷得跟玄冰似的，但真正要命的却是低温。它会无声无息地逮住你，比威尔还安静，起初你会发抖、牙齿打颤、两腿一伸，梦见滚烫的酒，温暖的营火。很烫人，是的，再也没什么像寒冷那样烫人了。但只消一会儿，它便会钻进你体内，填满你的身体，过不了多久你就没力气抵抗，渴望坐下休息或小睡片刻，据说到最后完全不觉痛苦。你只是浑身无力，昏昏欲睡，然后一切渐渐消逝，最后，就像淹没在热牛奶里一样，安详而恬静。”
“Such eloquence, Gared,” Ser Waymar observed. “I never suspected you had it in you.”
“我看你蛮有诗意嘛，”威玛爵士下了评论，“没想到你还有这方面的天分。”
“I’ve had the cold in me too, lordling.” Gared pulled back his hood, giving Ser Waymar a good long look at the stumps where his ears had been. “Two ears, three toes, and the little finger off my left hand. I got off light. We found my brother frozen at his watch, with a smile on his face.”
“大人，我亲身体验过严寒的威力，”盖瑞往后拉开他的兜帽，好让威玛爵士看清楚他耳朵冻掉之后剩下的肉团。“两只耳朵，三根脚趾，还有左手的小指，我这算是轻伤了。我大哥当年就是站岗的时候活活冻死的，等我们找到他，他脸上还挂着笑容。”
Ser Waymar shrugged. “You ought dress more warmly, Gared.”
威玛爵士耸耸肩道：“我说盖瑞，你该多穿两件衣服。”
Gared glared at the lordling, the scars around his ear holes flushed red with anger where Maester Aemon had cut the ears away. “We’ll see how warm you can dress when the winter comes.” He pulled up his hood and hunched over his garron, silent and sullen.
盖瑞怒视着他的年轻长官，气得耳根发红。当年伊蒙学士⑤把他坏死的耳朵割去，如今耳洞旁还留着伤疤。“等冬天真正来临时，看你能穿得多暖。”他拉起兜帽，缩着身子骑上马，阴沉地不再吭声。
“If Gared said it was the cold …” Will began.
“既然盖瑞都说是天气的关系了……”威尔正要开口。
“Have you drawn any watches this past week, Will?”
“威尔，上周你有没有站岗？”
“Yes, m’lord.” There never was a week when he did not draw a dozen bloody watches. What was the man driving at?
“有啊，大人。”他哪星期没抽到站岗的签，这家伙究竟想说什么？
“And how did you find the Wall?”
“长城的情形如何？”
“Weeping,” Will said, frowning. He saw it clear enough, now that the lordling had pointed it out. “They couldn’t have froze. Not if the Wall was weeping. It wasn’t cold enough.”
“在‘哭泣’啊，”威尔皱着眉头说。这下他明白了。“所以他们不是冻死的，假如城墙会滴水，表示天气还不够冷。”
Royce nodded. “Bright lad. We’ve had a few light frosts this past week, and a quick flurry of snow now and then, but surely no cold fierce enough to kill eight grown men. Men clad in fur and leather, let me remind you, with shelter near at hand, and the means of making fire.” The knight’s smile was cocksure. “Will, lead us there. I would see these dead men for myself.”
罗伊斯点点头。“聪明。过去这周结了点霜，偶尔还下点雪，但绝对没有冷到冻死八个人的地步。更何况他们穿着保暖的毛皮御寒，所处地形足以遮挡风雪，还有充足的生火材料。”骑士露出充满自信的笑容。“威尔，带路罢，我要亲眼看看这些死人。”
And then there was nothing to be done for it. The order had been given, and honor bound them to obey.
事情至此，他们别无选择。既然命令已下，也只有照办的份儿。
Will went in front, his shaggy little garron picking the way carefully through the undergrowth. A light snow had fallen the night before, and there were stones and roots and hidden sinks lying just under its crust, waiting for the careless and the unwary. Ser Waymar Royce came next, his great black destrier snorting impatiently. The warhorse was the wrong mount for ranging, but try and tell that to the lordling. Gared brought up the rear. The old man-at-arms muttered to himself as he rode.
威尔打前锋，骑着他那匹长毛的马，在矮树丛里小小心翼翼地探路。昨夜下了一场小雪，这会儿树丛底下有许多石块、树根和水洼，一不小心就会摔倒。威玛·罗伊斯爵士跟在后面，他那匹高壮骏马不耐烦地吐着气。巡逻任务最不适合骑战马，但贵族子弟哪听得进去？老兵盖瑞殿后，一路低声喃喃自语。
Twilight deepened. The cloudless sky turned a deep purple, the color of an old bruise, then faded to black. The stars began to come out. A half-moon rose. Will was grateful for the light.
暮色渐沉，无云的天空转为淤青般的深紫，然后没入黑幕。星星出来了，新月也升起。威尔暗自感谢星月的光辉。
“We can make a better pace than this, surely,” Royce said when the moon was full risen.
“我们应该可以再走快点。”罗伊斯说。这时月亮已快升上天顶。
“Not with this horse,” Will said. Fear had made him insolent. “Perhaps my lord would care to take the lead?”
“你的马没这能耐，”威尔道，恐惧使他无礼起来。“少爷您走前面试试？”
Ser Waymar Royce did not deign to reply.
威玛·罗伊斯爵士显然不屑回答。
Somewhere off in the wood a wolf howled.
树林深处传来一声狼嗥。
Will pulled his garron over beneath an ancient gnarled ironwood and dismounted.
威尔在一棵长满树瘤的老铁树旁停住，下了马。
“Why are you stopping?” Ser Waymar asked.
“为何停下？”威玛爵士问。
“Best go the rest of the way on foot, m’lord. It’s just over that ridge.”
“大人，后面的路步行比较好，翻过那道山脊就到。”
Royce paused a moment, staring off into the distance, his face reflective. A cold wind whispered through the trees. His great sable cloak stirred behind like something half-alive.
罗伊斯也停下来凝神远望，一脸思索的表情。阵阵冷风飒飒响彻林间，他的貂皮大衣在背后抖了抖，仿佛有了生命。
“There’s something wrong here,” Gared muttered.
“这儿不太对劲。”盖瑞喃喃地说。
The young knight gave him a disdainful smile. “Is there?”
年轻骑士对他轻蔑地一笑。“是吗？”
“Can’t you feel it?” Gared asked. “Listen to the darkness.”
“你难道没感觉？”盖瑞质问，“仔细听听暗处的声音。”
Will could feel it. Four years in the Night’s Watch, and he had never been so afraid. What was it?
威尔也感觉到了。在守夜人服役这四年来，他从未如此恐惧。究竟是什么东西在作怪？
“Wind. Trees rustling. A wolf. Which sound is it that unmans you so, Gared?” When Gared did not answer, Royce slid gracefully from his saddle. He tied the destrier securely to a low-hanging limb, well away from the other horses, and drew his longsword from its sheath. Jewels glittered in its hilt, and the moonlight ran down the shining steel. It was a splendid weapon, castle-forged, and new-made from the look of it. Will doubted it had ever been swung in anger.
“风声，树叶沙沙响，还有狼嚎。盖瑞，是哪一种把你吓破胆啦？”罗伊斯见盖瑞没接腔，便优雅地翻身下马。他把战马牢牢地绑在一根低垂的枝干上，跟其他两匹离得远远的，然后抽出长剑。这是把城里打造的好剑，剑柄镶着珠宝，熠熠发亮，月光在明晃晃的钢剑身上反射出璀璨光芒，无疑是新打造的。威尔很怀疑它有没有沾过血。
“The trees press close here,” Will warned. “That sword will tangle you up, m’lord. Better a knife.”
“大人，这儿树长得很密，”威尔警告，“可能会缠住您的剑，还是用短刀罢。”
“If I need instruction, I will ask for it,” the young lord said. “Gared, stay here. Guard the horses.”
“我需要指导的时候自然会开口。”年轻贵族道，“盖瑞，你守在这里，看好马匹。”
Gared dismounted. “We need a fire. I’ll see to it.”
盖瑞下马。“我来生个火。”
“How big a fool are you, old man? If there are enemies in this wood, a fire is the last thing we want.”
“老头子，愚蠢也有个限度。若这林子里有敌人，我们难道要生火引他们过来么？”
“There’s some enemies a fire will keep away,” Gared said. “Bears and direwolves and … and other things …”
“有些东西就只怕火，”盖瑞道，“比如熊、冰原狼、还有……还有好些东西。”
Ser Waymar’s mouth became a hard line. “No fire.”
威玛爵士紧抿嘴唇。“我说不准就是不准。”
Gared’s hood shadowed his face, but Will could see the hard glitter in his eyes as he stared at the knight. For a moment he was afraid the older man would go for his sword. It was a short, ugly thing, its grip discolored by sweat, its edge nicked from hard use, but Will would not have given an iron bob for the lordling’s life if Gared pulled it from its scabbard.
盖瑞的斗篷遮住了他的脸，但威尔还是看得到他瞪骑士时的眼神。他一度害怕这老头会冲动地拔剑动粗。老头的剑虽然又短又丑，剑柄早被汗渍浸得没了颜色，剑刃也因长期使用而布满缺口，但若盖瑞真的拔剑，威尔知道那贵族公子哥儿必死无疑。
Finally Gared looked down. “No fire,” he muttered, low under his breath.
最后盖瑞低下头。“那就算了”。他讪讪地说。
Royce took it for acquiescence and turned away. “Lead on,” he said to Will.
罗伊斯于是妥协，“带路罢”。他对威尔说。
Will threaded their way through a thicket, then started up the slope to the low ridge where he had found his vantage point under a sentinel tree. Under the thin crust of snow, the ground was damp and muddy, slick footing, with rocks and hidden roots to trip you up. Will made no sound as he climbed. Behind him, he heard the soft metallic slither of the lordling’s ringmail, the rustle of leaves, and muttered curses as reaching branches grabbed at his longsword and tugged on his splendid sable cloak.
威尔领他穿越浓密树丛，爬上低缓斜坡，朝山脊走去，他先前便是在那儿的一棵树下找到藏身处所。薄薄的积雪底，地面潮湿而泥泞，极易滑倒，石块和暗藏的树根也能绊人一跤。威尔爬坡时没有发出任何声响，身后却不时传来公子哥环甲的金属碰撞，叶子摩擦，以及分叉枝干绊住他的长剑，勾住他漂亮貂皮斗篷时所发出的咒骂声。
The great sentinel was right there at the top of the ridge, where Will had known it would be, its lowest branches a bare foot off the ground. Will slid in underneath, flat on his belly in the snow and the mud, and looked down on the empty clearing below.
威尔知道那棵大哨兵树位于山脊最高处，底部枝干离地仅有一尺。于是他爬进矮树丛，平趴在残雪和泥泞里，往下方空旷的平地望去。
His heart stopped in his chest. For a moment he dared not breathe. Moonlight shone down on the clearing, the ashes of the firepit, the snow-covered lean-to, the great rock, the little half-frozen stream. Everything was just as it had been a few hours ago.
他的心脏停止了跳动，好一阵不敢呼吸。月光洒落在空地上，映照出营火余烬，白雪覆盖的岩石，半结冰的小溪，全都和数小时前所见一模一样。
They were gone. All the bodies were gone.
惟一的差别是，所有的人都不见了。
“Gods!” he heard behind him. A sword slashed at a branch as Ser Waymar Royce gained the ridge. He stood there beside the sentinel, longsword in hand, his cloak billowing behind him as the wind came up, outlined nobly against the stars for all to see.
“诸神保佑！”他听见背后传来的声音。威玛·罗伊斯爵士挥剑劈砍树枝，总算上了坡顶。他站在哨兵树旁，手握宝剑，披风被吹得噼啪作响，明亮的星光清楚地勾勒出他高贵的身影。
“Get down!” Will whispered urgently. “Something’s wrong.”
“快趴下来！”威尔焦急地低声说：“出怪事了。”
Royce did not move. He looked down at the empty clearing and laughed. “Your dead men seem to have moved camp, Will.”
罗伊斯没动，他俯瞰着下面空荡荡的平地笑道：“威尔，看来你说的那些死人转移阵地啰。”
Will’s voice abandoned him. He groped for words that did not come. It was not possible. His eyes swept back and forth over the abandoned campsite, stopped on the axe. A huge double-bladed battle-axe, still lying where he had seen it last, untouched. A valuable weapon …
威尔仿佛突然间丧失了说话能力，他竭力寻找合适的字眼，却徒劳无功。怎么会有这种事，他的视线在荒废的营地中来回扫视，最后停留在那柄斧头上。这么一把巨大的双刃战斧，竟会留在原地纹丝不动。照说这么值钱的家伙……
“On your feet, Will,” Ser Waymar commanded. “There’s no one here. I won’t have you hiding under a bush.”
“威尔，起来罢。”威玛爵士命令道，“这里没人，躲躲藏藏的，成何体统！”
Reluctantly, Will obeyed.
威尔很不情愿地照办。
Ser Waymar looked him over with open disapproval. “I am not going back to Castle Black a failure on my first ranging. We will find these men.” He glanced around. “Up the tree. Be quick about it. Look for a fire.”
威玛爵士不满地上下打量他。“我可不想第一次巡逻就铩羽而归。我们一定要找到这些家伙。”他环顾四周。“爬到树上去看看，动作快，注意附近有没有火光。”
Will turned away, wordless. There was no use to argue. The wind was moving. It cut right through him. He went to the tree, a vaulting grey-green sentinel, and began to climb. Soon his hands were sticky with sap, and he was lost among the needles. Fear filled his gut like a meal he could not digest. He whispered a prayer to the nameless gods of the wood, and slipped his dirk free of its sheath. He put it between his teeth to keep both hands free for climbing. The taste of cold iron in his mouth gave him comfort.
威尔无言地转身，知道辩解无益。风势转强，有如刀割。他走到高耸笔直的青灰色哨兵树旁开始往上爬。很快他便消失在无边松针里，双手沾满树汁。恐惧像肚里一顿难以消化的饭菜，他只能向不知名的森林之神默祷，一边抽出匕首，用牙咬住，空出双手攀爬。嘴里冰冷的兵器让他稍微安了点心。
Down below, the lordling called out suddenly, “Who goes there?” Will heard uncertainty in the challenge. He stopped climbing; he listened; he watched.
下方突然传来年轻贵族的喊叫。“谁在那里？”威尔在他的恫吓中听出了不安，便停止爬行，凝神谛听，仔细观察。
The woods gave answer: the rustle of leaves, the icy rush of the stream, a distant hoot of a snow owl.
森林给了他答案：树叶沙沙作响，寒溪潺潺脉动，远方传来雪枭的呐喊。
The Others made no sound.
异鬼无声无息地出现。
Will saw movement from the corner of his eye. Pale shapes gliding through the wood. He turned his head, glimpsed a white shadow in the darkness. Then it was gone. Branches stirred gently in the wind, scratching at one another with wooden fingers. Will opened his mouth to call down a warning, and the words seemed to freeze in his throat. Perhaps he was wrong. Perhaps it had only been a bird, a reflection on the snow, some trick of the moonlight. What had he seen, after all?
威尔的眼角余光瞄到白色身影穿过树林。他转过头，看见黑暗中一道白影，随即又消失不见。树枝在风中微微悸动，伸出木指彼此搔抓。威尔张口想出声警告，言语却冻结在他的喉头。或许是看错了，或许那不过是只鸟，或是雪地上的反光，更或许是月光造成的错觉。他到底看到了什么？
“Will, where are you?” Ser Waymar called up. “Can you see anything?” He was turning in a slow circle, suddenly wary, his sword in hand. He must have felt them, as Will felt them. There was nothing to see. “Answer me! Why is it so cold?”
“威尔，你在哪里？”威玛爵士朝上方喊，“你看到什么了吗？”他突然提高警觉，手中持剑缓缓转圈。他一定也和威尔一样感觉到了。然而四周却空无一人。“快回答我！这里为什么这么冷？”
It was cold. Shivering, Will clung more tightly to his perch. His face pressed hard against the trunk of the sentinel. He could feel the sweet, sticky sap on his cheek.
这里真的非常冷。威尔颤抖着抱紧树干，面颊贴住哨兵树的树皮。黏稠而甜腻的树汁流到他脸上。
A shadow emerged from the dark of the wood. It stood in front of Royce. Tall, it was, and gaunt and hard as old bones, with flesh pale as milk. Its armor seemed to change color as it moved; here it was white as new-fallen snow, there black as shadow, everywhere dappled with the deep grey-green of the trees. The patterns ran like moonlight on water with every step it took.
一道阴影突然自树林暗处冒出，站到罗伊斯面前。它的体型十分高大，憔悴坚毅浑似枯骨，肤色苍白如同乳汁。它的盔甲似乎会随着移动而改变颜色，一会儿白如新雪，一会儿黑如暗影，处处点缀着森林的深奥灰绿。它每走一步，其上的图案便似水面上的粼粼月光般不断改变。
Will heard the breath go out of Ser Waymar Royce in a long hiss. “Come no farther,” the lordling warned. His voice cracked like a boy’s. He threw the long sable cloak back over his shoulders, to free his arms for battle, and took his sword in both hands. The wind had stopped. It was very cold.
威尔只听威玛·罗伊斯爵士倒抽一口冷气。“不要过来！”贵族少爷警告对方，声音却小得像个孩童。他将那件长长的貂皮大衣翻到背后，空出活动空间，双手持剑。风已停，寒彻骨。
The Other slid forward on silent feet. In its hand was a longsword like none that Will had ever seen. No human metal had gone into the forging of that blade. It was alive with moonlight, translucent, a shard of crystal so thin that it seemed almost to vanish when seen edge-on. There was a faint blue shimmer to the thing, a ghost-light that played around its edges, and somehow Will knew it was sharper than any razor.
异鬼安静地向前滑行，手中握着长剑，威尔从没见过类似的武器。那是把半透明的剑，材质完全不是人类所使用的金属，更像是一片极薄的水晶碎片，倘若平放刃面，几乎无从发现。它与月光相互辉映，剑身周围有股淡淡而诡异的蓝光。不知怎地，威尔明白这柄剑比任何剃刀都要锋利。
Ser Waymar met him bravely. “Dance with me then.” He lifted his sword high over his head, defiant. His hands trembled from the weight of it, or perhaps from the cold. Yet in that moment, Will thought, he was a boy no longer, but a man of the Night’s Watch.
威玛爵士勇敢地迎上前去。“既然如此，我们就来较量较量罢。”他举剑过头，语带挑衅。虽然他的手不知因为重量或是酷寒而颤抖，威尔却觉得在那一刻，他已经不再是个软弱怯懦的少年，而成了真正的守夜人男子汉。
The Other halted. Will saw its eyes; blue, deeper and bluer than any human eyes, a blue that burned like ice. They fixed on the longsword trembling on high, watched the moonlight running cold along the metal. For a heartbeat he dared to hope.
异鬼停住脚步。威尔看到了它的眼睛，那是一种比任何人眼都要湛蓝深邃的颜色，如玄冰一般冷冷燃烧。它把视线停留在对方高举的颤抖着的剑上，凝视着冷冷月光在金属剑缘流动。那一刹那，威尔觉得事情还有转机。
They emerged silently from the shadows, twins to the first. Three of them … four … five … Ser Waymar may have felt the cold that came with them, but he never saw them, never heard them. Will had to call out. It was his duty. And his death, if he did. He shivered, and hugged the tree, and kept the silence.
此时它们静悄悄地从阴影里冒出来，与第一个异鬼长得一模一样，三个……四个……五个……，威玛爵士或许能感觉伴随他们而来的寒意，但他既没看到它们、也没听见它们的声音。威尔应该警告他，毕竟那是他职责所在。然而一旦出声，他便必死无疑。于是他颤抖着紧抱树干，不敢作声。
The pale sword came shivering through the air.
惨白的长剑厉声破空。
Ser Waymar met it with steel. When the blades met, there was no ring of metal on metal; only a high, thin sound at the edge of hearing, like an animal screaming in pain. Royce checked a second blow, and a third, then fell back a step. Another flurry of blows, and he fell back again.
威玛爵士举起钢剑迎敌。当两剑交击，发出的却非金属碰撞，而是一种位于人类听觉极限边缘，又高又细，像是动物痛苦哀嚎的声音。罗伊斯挡住第二道攻击，接着是第三道，然后退了一步。又一阵刀光剑影之后，他再度后退。
Behind him, to right, to left, all around him, the watchers stood patient, faceless, silent, the shifting patterns of their delicate armor making them all but invisible in the wood. Yet they made no move to interfere.
在他左右两侧，前后周围，其余异鬼耐心地伫立旁观。它们一声不吭，面无表情，盔甲上不断变化的细致图案在树林中格外显眼。它们迟迟未出手干预。
Again and again the swords met, until Will wanted to cover his ears against the strange anguished keening of their clash. Ser Waymar was panting from the effort now, his breath steaming in the moonlight. His blade was white with frost; the Other’s danced with pale blue light.
两人不断交手，直到威尔想要捂住耳朵，再也无法忍受武器碰撞时刺耳的诡异声响。威玛爵士的呼吸开始急促，呼出的气在月光下蒸腾如烟。他的长剑已结满白霜，异鬼的剑则依旧闪耀着苍蓝光芒。
Then Royce’s parry came a beat too late. The pale sword bit through the ringmail beneath his arm. The young lord cried out in pain. Blood welled between the rings. It steamed in the cold, and the droplets seemed red as fire where they touched the snow. Ser Waymar’s fingers brushed his side. His moleskin glove came away soaked with red.
这时罗伊斯一记挡格慢了一拍，惨白色的剑顿时咬穿他腋下环甲。年轻贵族痛苦地喊了一声，鲜血流淌在铁环间，炽热的血液在冷空气中蒸汽朦朦，滴到雪地的血泊，红得像火。威玛爵士伸手按住伤口，鼹鼠皮手套整个浸成鲜红。
The Other said something in a language that Will did not know; his voice was like the cracking of ice on a winter lake, and the words were mocking.
异鬼开口用一种威尔听不懂的语言说了几句话，声音如冰湖碎裂，腔调充满嘲弄。
Ser Waymar Royce found his fury. “For Robert!” he shouted, and he came up snarling, lifting the frost-covered longsword with both hands and swinging it around in a flat sidearm slash with all his weight behind it. The Other’s parry was almost lazy.
威玛·罗伊斯爵士找回了勇气。“劳勃国王万岁！”他高声怒吼，双手紧紧握住覆满白霜的长剑，使尽全身力气疯狂挥舞。异鬼泰然自若。
When the blades touched, the steel shattered.
两剑相击，钢剑应声碎裂。
A scream echoed through the forest night, and the longsword shivered into a hundred brittle pieces, the shards scattering like a rain of needles. Royce went to his knees, shrieking, and covered his eyes. Blood welled between his fingers.
尖叫声回荡在深夜的林里，罗伊斯的长剑裂成千千碎片，如同一阵针雨四散甩落。罗伊斯惨叫着跪下，伸手捂住双眼，鲜血从他指缝间汩汩流下。
The watchers moved forward together, as if some signal had been given. Swords rose and fell, all in a deathly silence. It was cold butchery. The pale blades sliced through ringmail as if it were silk. Will closed his eyes. Far beneath him, he heard their voices and laughter sharp as icicles.
旁观的异鬼仿佛接收到什么讯号，这时一涌向前。一片死寂之中，剑雨纷飞，这是场冷酷的屠杀。惨白的剑刃砍丝般切进环甲。威尔闭上眼睛。他听见地面上远远传来它们的谈笑声，尖利一如冰针。
When he found the courage to look again, a long time had passed, and the ridge below was empty.
良久，他终于鼓起勇气睁开眼睛。树下的山脊空无一人。
He stayed in the tree, scarce daring to breathe, while the moon crept slowly across the black sky. Finally, his muscles cramping and his fingers numb with cold, he climbed down.
月亮缓缓爬过漆黑的天幕，但他依旧留在树上，吓得大气也不敢出。最后，他驱动抽筋的肌肉和冻僵的手指，爬回树下。
Royce’s body lay facedown in the snow, one arm outflung. The thick sable cloak had been slashed in a dozen places. Lying dead like that, you saw how young he was. A boy.
罗伊斯的尸体面朝下倒卧在雪地里，一只手臂朝外伸出，厚重的貂皮披风被砍得惨不忍睹。见他命丧于此，才发现他原来有多年轻，不过是个大孩子罢了。
He found what was left of the sword a few feet away, the end splintered and twisted like a tree struck by lightning. Will knelt, looked around warily, and snatched it up. The broken sword would be his proof. Gared would know what to make of it, and if not him, then surely that old bear Mormont or Maester Aemon. Would Gared still be waiting with the horses? He had to hurry.
他在几尺外找到断剑的残骸，剑身像遭雷击的树顶支离破碎。威尔弯下腰，小心翼翼地环顾四周之后才把剑捡起来。他要拿这柄断剑当证物，盖瑞会知道该怎么做。就算他不知道，“熊老”莫尔蒙或伊蒙学士也一定有办法。盖瑞还守着马匹等他回去么？最好加快脚步。
Will rose. Ser Waymar Royce stood over him.
威尔起身。威玛·罗伊斯爵士站在他面前。
His fine clothes were a tatter, his face a ruin. A shard from his sword transfixed the blind white pupil of his left eye.
他的华裳尽碎，容貌全毁，断剑的裂片反映出他左眼瞳孔的一片茫然。
The right eye was open. The pupil burned blue. It saw.
他的右眼却是张开的，瞳孔中烧着蓝火，看着活人。
The broken sword fell from nerveless fingers. Will closed his eyes to pray. Long, elegant hands brushed his cheek, then tightened around his throat. They were gloved in the finest moleskin and sticky with blood, yet the touch was icy cold.
断剑从威尔无力的手中落下，他闭眼默祷。优雅修长的双手拂过他的两颊，掐住他的咽喉。这双手虽然包裹在最上等的鼹鼠皮手套里，且满是黏稠血块，却冰冷无比。
*BRAN
第二章 布兰
T he morning had dawned clear and cold, with a crispness that hinted at the end of summer. They set forth at daybreak to see a man beheaded, twenty in all, and Bran rode among them, nervous with excitement. This was the first time he had been deemed old enough to go with his lord father and his brothers to see the king’s justice done. It was the ninth year of summer, and the seventh of Bran’s life.
晨色清冷，带着一丝寂寥，隐然暗示夏日将尽。为数二十人的队伍于破晓时分启程，布兰策马置身其间，满心焦虑又兴奋难耐。这次他年纪总算够大，可与父兄同往刑场，一观国王律法的执行。这是夏天的第九年，布兰七岁。
The man had been taken outside a small holdfast in the hills. Robb thought he was a wildling, his sword sworn to Mance Rayder, the King-beyond-the-Wall. It made Bran’s skin prickle to think of it. He remembered the hearth tales Old Nan told them. The wildlings were cruel men, she said, slavers and slayers and thieves. They consorted with giants and ghouls, stole girl children in the dead of night, and drank blood from polished horns. And their women lay with the Others in the Long Night to sire terrible half-human children.
死囚已被领至小丘上的庄园，罗柏认为他是个誓死效忠“塞外之王”曼斯·雷德的野人。布兰想起老奶妈在火炉边说过的故事，不禁浑身起了鸡皮疙瘩。她说野人生性凶残蛮横，个个都是贩卖奴隶、杀人放火的偷盗之徒。他们与巨人族、食尸鬼狼狈为奸，趁黑夜诱拐童女，还以磨亮的兽角啜饮鲜血。他们的女人则相传在远古的“长夜”里与异鬼媾合，繁衍半人半鬼的恐怖后代。
But the man they found bound hand and foot to the holdfast wall awaiting the king’s justice was old and scrawny, not much taller than Robb. He had lost both ears and a finger to frostbite, and he dressed all in black, the same as a brother of the Night’s Watch, except that his furs were ragged and greasy.
然而眼前这个老人削瘦枯槁，比罗柏高不了多少，手脚紧缚身后，静待国王的旨意发落。他在酷寒中因冻疮失去了双耳和一根手指。而他全身漆黑的衣服，与守夜人弟兄们的制服没有两样，只不过衣衫褴褛，脓疮四溢。
The breath of man and horse mingled, steaming, in the cold morning air as his lord father had the man cut down from the wall and dragged before them. Robb and Jon sat tall and still on their horses, with Bran between them on his pony, trying to seem older than seven, trying to pretend that he’d seen all this before. A faint wind blew through the holdfast gate. Over their heads flapped the banner of the Starks of Winterfell: a grey direwolf racing across an ice-white field.
人马的气息在清晨的冷空气里交织成蒸腾的雪白雾网，父亲下令将墙边的人犯松绑，拖到队伍前面。罗柏和琼恩直挺背脊，昂然跨坐鞍背；布兰则骑着小马停在两人中间，努力想表现出七岁孩童所没有的成熟气度，仿佛眼前一切早已司空见惯。微风吹过栅门，众人头顶飘扬着临冬城史塔克家族的旗帜，上面画着白底灰色的冰原奔狼。
Bran’s father sat solemnly on his horse, long brown hair stirring in the wind. His closely trimmed beard was shot with white, making him look older than his thirty-five years. He had a grim cast to his grey eyes this day, and he seemed not at all the man who would sit before the fire in the evening and talk softly of the age of heroes and the children of the forest. He had taken off Father’s face, Bran thought, and donned the face of Lord Stark of Winterfell.
父亲神情肃穆地骑在马上，满头棕色长发在风中飞扬。他修剪整齐的胡子里冒出几缕白丝，看起来比三十五岁的实际年龄要老些。这天他的灰色眼瞳严厉无情，怎么看也不像是那个会在风雪夜里端坐炉前，娓娓细述远古英雄纪元和森林之子故事的人。他已经摘下慈父的容颜，戴上临冬城主史塔克公爵的面具，布兰心想。
There were questions asked and answers given there in the chill of morning, but afterward Bran could not recall much of what had been said. Finally his lord father gave a command, and two of his guardsmen dragged the ragged man to the ironwood stump in the center of the square. They forced his head down onto the hard black wood. Lord Eddard Stark dismounted and his ward Theon Greyjoy brought forth the sword. “Ice,” that sword was called. It was as wide across as a man’s hand, and taller even than Robb. The blade was Valyrian steel, spell-forged and dark as smoke. Nothing held an edge like Valyrian steel.
清晨的寒意里，布兰听到有人问了些问题，以及问题的答案，然而事后他却想不起来究竟说过了哪些话。总之最后父亲下了命令，两名卫士便把那衣衫褴褛的人拖到空地中央的铁树木桩前，将头硬是按在漆黑的硬木上。艾德·史塔克解鞍下马，他的养子席恩·葛雷乔伊立刻递上宝剑。剑名“寒冰”，身宽过掌，立起来比罗柏还高。剑刃乃是用瓦雷利亚钢锻造而成，受过法术加持，颜色暗如黑烟。世上没有别的东西比瓦雷利亚钢更锐利。
His father peeled off his gloves and handed them to Jory Cassel, the captain of his household guard. He took hold of Ice with both hands and said, “In the name of Robert of the House Baratheon, the First of his Name, King of the Andals and the Rhoynar and the First Men, Lord of the Seven Kingdoms and Protector of the Realm, by the word of Eddard of the House Stark, Lord of Winterfell and Warden of the North, I do sentence you to die.” He lifted the greatsword high above his head.
父亲脱下手套，交给侍卫队长乔里·凯索，然后双手擎剑，朗声说道：“以安达尔人、洛伊拿人和‘先民’的国王，七国统治者暨全境守护者，拜拉席恩家族的劳勃一世之名，我临冬城公爵与北境守护，史塔克家族的艾德，在此宣判你死刑。”语毕，他将巨剑高举过头。
Bran’s bastard brother Jon Snow moved closer. “Keep the pony well in hand,” he whispered. “And don’t look away. Father will know if you do.”
布兰的异母哥哥琼恩·雪诺凑过来。“握紧缰绳，别让马儿乱动。还有，千万别扭头，不然父亲会知道。”
Bran kept his pony well in hand, and did not look away.
于是布兰紧握缰绳，没让小马乱动，也没有把头转开。
His father took off the man’s head with a single sure stroke. Blood sprayed out across the snow, as red as summerwine. One of the horses reared and had to be restrained to keep from bolting. Bran could not take his eyes off the blood. The snows around the stump drank it eagerly, reddening as he watched.
父亲巨剑一挥，利落地砍下死囚首级。鲜血溅洒在雪地上，殷红一如葡萄美酿夏日红。队伍中一匹马嘶声跃起，差点就要发狂乱跑。布兰目不转睛地直视血迹，只见树干旁的白雪饥渴地啜饮鲜血，在他的注视下迅速染成暗红。
The head bounced off a thick root and rolled. It came up near Greyjoy’s feet. Theon was a lean, dark youth of nineteen who found everything amusing. He laughed, put his boot on the head, and kicked it away.
人头翻过树根，滚至葛雷乔伊脚边。席恩是个身形精瘦，肤色黝黑的十九岁青年，对任何事物都觉得兴致勃勃。他咧嘴一笑，扬脚踢开人头。
“Ass,” Jon muttered, low enough so Greyjoy did not hear. He put a hand on Bran’s shoulder, and Bran looked over at his bastard brother. “You did well,” Jon told him solemnly. Jon was fourteen, an old hand at justice.
“混账东西。”琼恩低声咒道，刻意放低声音不让葛雷乔伊听见。他伸手搭住布兰肩膀，布兰也转头看着私生子哥哥。“你做得很好。”琼恩神情庄重地告诉他。琼恩今年十四岁，观看死刑对他来说已是司空见惯。
It seemed colder on the long ride back to Winterfell, though the wind had died by then and the sun was higher in the sky. Bran rode with his brothers, well ahead of the main party, his pony struggling hard to keep up with their horses.
冷风已停，暖阳高照，但返回临冬城的漫漫长路却似乎愈加寒冷。布兰与兄长并骑，远远走在队伍前方，他跨下小马气喘吁吁方能跟上兄长坐骑的迅捷步伐。
“The deserter died bravely,” Robb said. He was big and broad and growing every day, with his mother’s coloring, the fair skin, red-brown hair, and blue eyes of the Tullys of Riverrun. “He had courage, at the least.”
“这逃兵死得挺勇敢。”罗柏说。高大壮硕的他每天都在成长，他承袭了母亲的白皙肤色、红褐头发，以及徒利家族的蓝色眼眸。“不管怎么说，好歹他有点勇气。”
“No,” Jon Snow said quietly. “It was not courage. This one was dead of fear. You could see it in his eyes, Stark.” Jon’s eyes were a grey so dark they seemed almost black, but there was little they did not see. He was of an age with Robb, but they did not look alike. Jon was slender where Robb was muscular, dark where Robb was fair, graceful and quick where his half brother was strong and fast.
“不对，”琼恩静静地说，“那不算勇气。史塔克，这家伙正是因为恐惧而死的，你可以从他的眼神里看出来。”琼恩的灰色眼瞳深得近乎墨黑，但世间少有事物能逃过他的观察。他与罗柏同年，两人容貌却大相径庭：罗柏肌肉发达，皮肤白皙，强壮而动作迅速；琼恩则是体格精瘦，肤色沉黑，举止优雅而敏捷。
Robb was not impressed. “The Others take his eyes,” he swore. “He died well. Race you to the bridge?”
罗柏不以为然。“叫异鬼把他眼睛给挖了罢，”他咒道，“他总算是死得壮烈。怎么样，比赛谁先到桥边？”
“Done,” Jon said, kicking his horse forward. Robb cursed and followed, and they galloped off down the trail, Robb laughing and hooting, Jon silent and intent. The hooves of their horses kicked up showers of snow as they went.
“一言为定。”琼恩语毕两脚一夹马肚，纵骑前奔。罗柏咒骂几句后也追了上去，两人沿着路径向前急驰。罗柏又叫又笑，琼恩则凝神专注。马蹄在两人身后溅起一片翻飞雪雨。
Bran did not try to follow. His pony could not keep up. He had seen the ragged man’s eyes, and he was thinking of them now. After a while, the sound of Robb’s laughter receded, and the woods grew silent again.
布兰没有跟上去，他的小马没这般能耐。他方才见到了死囚的眼睛，现在则陷入沉思。没过多久，罗柏的笑声渐远，林间归于寂静。
So deep in thought was he that he never heard the rest of the party until his father moved up to ride beside him. “Are you well, Bran?” he asked, not unkindly.
太过专注的他，丝毫没注意到跟进的队伍已赶上自己，直到父亲骑马赶到身边，语带关切地问：“布兰，你还好吧？”
“Yes, Father,” Bran told him. He looked up. Wrapped in his furs and leathers, mounted on his great warhorse, his lord father loomed over him like a giant. “Robb says the man died bravely, but Jon says he was afraid.”
“父亲大人，我很好。”布兰应答，他抬头仰望父亲，父亲穿着毛皮大衣和皮革护甲，骑在雄骏战马上如巨人般笼罩住他。“罗柏说刚才那个人死得很勇敢，琼恩却说他死的时候很害怕。”
“What do you think?” his father asked.
“你自己怎么想呢？”他的父亲问。
Bran thought about it. “Can a man still be brave if he’s afraid?”
布兰寻思片刻后反问：“人在恐惧的时候还能勇敢吗？”
“That is the only time a man can be brave,” his father told him. “Do you understand why I did it?”
“人惟有恐惧的时候方能勇敢。”父亲告诉他，“你知道为什么我要杀他？”
“He was a wildling,” Bran said. “They carry off women and sell them to the Others.”
“因为他是野人，”布兰不假思索地回答，“他们绑架女人，然后把她们卖给异鬼。”
His lord father smiled. “Old Nan has been telling you stories again. In truth, the man was an oathbreaker, a deserter from the Night’s Watch. No man is more dangerous. The deserter knows his life is forfeit if he is taken, so he will not flinch from any crime, no matter how vile. But you mistake me. The question was not why the man had to die, but why I must do it.”
父亲微笑道：“老奶妈又跟你说故事了。那人其实是个逃兵，背弃了守夜人的誓言。世间最危险的人莫过于此，因为他们自知一旦被捕，只有死路一条，于是恶向胆边生，再伤天害理的勾当也干得出来。不过你会错了意，我不是问你他为什么要死，而是我为何要亲自行刑”。
Bran had no answer for that. “King Robert has a headsman,” he said, uncertainly.
布兰想不出答案。“我只知道劳勃国王有个刽子手，”他不太确定地说。
“He does,” his father admitted. “As did the Targaryen kings before him. Yet our way is the older way. The blood of the First Men still flows in the veins of the Starks, and we hold to the belief that the man who passes the sentence should swing the sword. If you would take a man’s life, you owe it to him to look into his eyes and hear his final words. And if you cannot bear to do that, then perhaps the man does not deserve to die.
“他确实是由王家刽子手代劳，执行国王律法，”父亲承认，“在他之前的坦格利安王朝也是如此。但我们遵循古老的传统，史塔克家族的人体内仍流有‘先民’的血液，而我们相信判决死刑的人必须亲自动手。如果你要取人性命，至少应该注视他的双眼，聆听他的临终遗言。倘若做不到这点，那么或许他罪不致死。”
“One day, Bran, you will be Robb’s bannerman, holding a keep of your own for your brother and your king, and justice will fall to you. When that day comes, you must take no pleasure in the task, but neither must you look away. A ruler who hides behind paid executioners soon forgets what death is.”
“布兰，有朝一日你会成为罗柏的封臣，为你哥哥和国王治理属于自己的领地，届时你也必须执掌律法。当那天来临时，你绝不可以杀戮为乐，亦不能逃避责任。统治者若是躲在幕后，付钱给刽子手执行，很快就会忘记死亡为何物。”
That was when Jon reappeared on the crest of the hill before them. He waved and shouted down at them. “Father , Bran, come quickly, see what Robb has found!” Then he was gone again.
这时琼恩出现在他们前面的坡顶，挥手朝下大喊：“父亲大人，布兰，快来看看罗柏找到了什么！”语毕又消失在丘陵后方。
Jory rode up beside them. “Trouble, my lord?”
乔里赶上前来，“大人，出事了吗？”
“Beyond a doubt,” his lord father said. “Come, let us see what mischief my sons have rooted out now.” He sent his horse into a trot. Jory and Bran and the rest came after.
“那还用说，”父亲大人答道，“来罢，我们去看看我那调皮的儿子又闯了什么祸。”他策马狂奔，乔里、布兰以及其他人也跟了上去。
They found Robb on the riverbank north of the bridge, with Jon still mounted beside him. The late summer snows had been heavy this moonturn. Robb stood knee-deep in white, his hood pulled back so the sun shone in his hair. He was cradling something in his arm, while the boys talked in hushed, excited voices.
他们在桥北河畔找到罗柏，琼恩仍在马上。这个月来，晚夏的积雪沉厚，罗柏站在及膝深的雪中，披风后敞，阳光在他发际闪耀。他怀里抱着不知什么东西，正和琼恩两人兴奋地窃语交谈。
The riders picked their way carefully through the drifts, groping for solid footing on the hidden, uneven ground. Jory Cassel and Theon Greyjoy were the first to reach the boys. Greyjoy was laughing and joking as he rode. Bran heard the breath go out of him. “Gods!” he exclaimed, struggling to keep control of his horse as he reached for his sword.
队伍骑马小心地穿过河面的诸多浮物，寻找隐藏于雪地之下的崎岖地面。乔里·凯索和席恩·葛雷乔伊最先赶到男孩身边。葛雷乔伊原本正有说有笑，紧接着布兰却听他倒抽一口气。“诸神保佑！”他惊叫起来伸手拔剑，一边挣扎着稳住坐骑。
Jory’s sword was already out. “Robb, get away from it!” he called as his horse reared under him.
乔里的佩剑已然出鞘，“罗柏，离那东西远点！”他刚叫出声，坐骑便已前蹄高举，人立空中。
Robb grinned and looked up from the bundle in his arms. “She can’t hurt you,” he said. “She’s dead, Jory.”
罗柏怀里抱着一团东西，这时他嘻嘻笑着抬起头，“她伤不了你的，”他说，“乔里，她已经死啦。”
Bran was afire with curiosity by then. He would have spurred the pony faster, but his father made them dismount beside the bridge and approach on foot. Bran jumped off and ran.
布兰满心好奇，焦躁不安，一心只想教鞍下小马再跑快点，但父亲却要他在桥边下马，徒步前往。他迫不及待地跳下马，三步并作两步地跑了过去。
By then Jon, Jory, and Theon Greyjoy had all dismounted as well. “What in the seven hells is it?” Greyjoy was saying.
等他到来，琼恩、乔里和席恩·葛雷乔伊都已下马。“七层地狱啊，这是什么鬼东西？”葛雷乔伊喃喃道。
“A wolf,” Robb told him.
“狼。”罗柏告诉他。
“A freak,” Greyjoy said. “Look at the size of it.”
“胡说，”葛雷乔伊反驳，“狼哪有这么大的？”
Bran’s heart was thumping in his chest as he pushed through a waist-high drift to his brothers’ side.
布兰的心怦怦狂跳，他推开一堆齐腰的漂浮物，奔至兄长身旁。
Half-buried in bloodstained snow, a huge dark shape slumped in death. Ice had formed in its shaggy grey fur, and the faint smell of corruption clung to it like a woman’s perfume. Bran glimpsed blind eyes crawling with maggots, a wide mouth full of yellowed teeth. But it was the size of it that made him gasp. It was bigger than his pony, twice the size of the largest hound in his father’s kennel.
一个巨大的暗黝身形半掩在血渍斑驳的雪堆里，绵软而无生息。蓬松的灰绒毛已经结冰，腐朽的气息紧附其间，就像女人身上的香水味，布兰隐约瞥见它无神的眼窝里爬满蛆虫，咧嘴内满是黄牙。但真正吓住他的是这只狼的体形，它竟比他的小马还大，是他父亲最大的猎犬身躯的两倍。
“It’s no freak,” Jon said calmly. “That’s a direwolf. They grow larger than the other kind.”
“我没骗你，”琼恩正色道，“这确实是冰原狼，他们比其他狼都要大。”
Theon Greyjoy said, “There’s not been a direwolf sighted south of the Wall in two hundred years.”
席恩·葛雷乔伊说：“可两百年来，绝境长城以南没人见过半头冰原狼。”
“I see one now,” Jon replied.
“眼前不就是一头？”琼恩回答。
Bran tore his eyes away from the monster. That was when he noticed the bundle in Robb’s arms. He gave a cry of delight and moved closer. The pup was a tiny ball of grey-black fur, its eyes still closed. It nuzzled blindly against Robb’s chest as he cradled it, searching for milk among his leathers, making a sad little whimpery sound. Bran reached out hesitantly. “Go on,” Robb told him. “You can touch him.”
布兰努力将视线离开面前的怪物，这才注意到罗柏怀里抱着的东西。他高兴得叫了一声，随即靠过去。那只幼狼只是团灰黑的毛球，双眼仍未张开。它盲目地往罗柏胸膛磨蹭，在他的皮护甲上寻找奶头，发出哀伤的低吟。布兰有些犹豫地探出手，“没关系，”罗柏告诉他，“你可以摸摸看。”
Bran gave the pup a quick nervous stroke, then turned as Jon said, “Here you go.” His half brother put a second pup into his arms. “There are five of them.” Bran sat down in the snow and hugged the wolf pup to his face. Its fur was soft and warm against his cheek.
布兰非常紧张，飞快碰了小狼一下，听到琼恩的声音，便转过头。“瞧，这只是给你的。”他的私生子哥哥把第二头幼狼放进他怀里。“总共有五只呢。”布兰在雪地里坐下，把小狼温软的皮毛贴近自己脸颊。
“Direwolves loose in the realm, after so many years,” muttered Hullen, the master of horse. “I like it not.”
“经过了这么多年，冰原狼突然重现人间，”马房总管胡伦喃喃道，“这种事我可不喜欢。”
“It is a sign,” Jory said.
“这是个坏兆头。”乔里说。
Father frowned. “This is only a dead animal, Jory,” he said. Yet he seemed troubled. Snow crunched under his boots as he moved around the body. “Do we know what killed her?”
父亲皱起眉头。“乔里，不过是头死狼罢了。”他说，但脸庞却蒙上了一层阴霾。他绕着狼尸，积雪在他脚下碎裂。“知道它被什么杀死的吗？”
“There’s something in the throat,” Robb told him, proud to have found the answer before his father even asked. “There, just under the jaw.”
“喉咙里好像有东西。”罗柏得意地回答，暗暗为自己能在父亲提出疑问前找到解答而骄傲。“就在下巴底下。”
His father knelt and groped under the beast’s head with his hand. He gave a yank and held it up for all to see. A foot of shattered antler, tines snapped off, all wet with blood.
他的父亲蹲下来，伸手探向狼尸的头底，使劲一拧，举起某个物体让大家看。原来那是一只碎裂的鹿角，分叉断尽，染满鲜血。
A sudden silence descended over the party. The men looked at the antler uneasily, and no one dared to speak. Even Bran could sense their fear, though he did not understand.
一阵突如其来的寂静笼罩了队伍，众人局促不安地看着那只鹿角，没有人出声说话。布兰虽然不解旁人为何惊恐，却也能感觉得到他们的惧怕。
His father tossed the antler to the side and cleansed his hands in the snow. “I’m surprised she lived long enough to whelp,” he said. His voice broke the spell.
父亲扔开鹿角，在雪地里把手弄干净。“没想到它还有力气把孩子生下来。”他的声音打破了先前的沉默。
“Maybe she didn’t,” Jory said. “I’ve heard tales … maybe the bitch was already dead when the pups came.”
“也许它没撑那么久，”乔里说：“我听过这样的传说……也许小狼降生时母狼就已经死了。”
“Born with the dead,” another man put in. “Worse luck.”
“随死降生，”另一个人接口道，“这是更坏的兆头。”
“No matter,” said Hullen. “They be dead soon enough too.”
“都没差，”胡伦说，“反正这些小家伙也活不长。”
Bran gave a wordless cry of dismay.
布兰发出无声的失望叹息。
“The sooner the better,” Theon Greyjoy agreed. He drew his sword. “Give the beast here, Bran.”
“我看它们死得越快越好，”席恩·葛雷乔伊同意，他抽出佩剑。“布兰，把那东西丢过来。”
The little thing squirmed against him, as if it heard and understood. “No!” Bran cried out fiercely. “It’s mine.”
布兰怀中的小东西仿佛听懂人话，偎着他蠕动了一下。“不要！”他坚决地叫道，“它是我的。”
“Put away your sword, Greyjoy,” Robb said. For a moment he sounded as commanding as their father, like the lord he would someday be. “We will keep these pups.”
“葛雷乔伊，把剑拿开。”罗柏说，那一刹那，他听起来像父亲一样威严有力，正如他有朝一日将会成为的一方领主。“我们要养这些小狼。”
“You cannot do that, boy,” said Harwin, who was Hullen’s son.
“小子，这是行不通的。”胡伦的儿子哈尔温道。
“It be a mercy to kill them,” Hullen said.
“杀了它们才是慈悲啊。”胡伦接口。
Bran looked to his lord father for rescue, but got only a frown, a furrowed brow. “Hullen speaks truly, son. Better a swift death than a hard one from cold and starvation.”
布兰朝父亲望去，期盼能找到救兵，却只见到深锁的双眉。“好儿子，胡伦说得没错。与其让它们挨饿受冻，不如干脆趁早了结。”
“No!” He could feel tears welling in his eyes, and he looked away. He did not want to cry in front of his father.
“不要！”他已经感觉到泪水在眼眶里打转，于是转开目光，他可不想在父亲面前落泪。
Robb resisted stubbornly. “Ser Rodrik’s red bitch whelped again last week,” he said. “It was a small litter, only two live pups. She’ll have milk enough.”
罗柏固执地继续抗拒。“罗德利克爵士的那头红母狗上星期才刚生产，”他说：“那胎死了不少，只有两只小狗活了下来，奶水应该还够它们喝。”
“She’ll rip them apart when they try to nurse.”
“它们只要想走近喝奶，立刻会被它撕成碎片。”
“Lord Stark,” Jon said. It was strange to hear him call Father that, so formal. Bran looked at him with desperate hope. “There are five pups,” he told Father. “Three male, two female.”
“史塔克大人，”琼恩说。听他如此正式地称呼自己父亲，实在很怪。布兰抱着最后一丝希望看着他。“总共有五只小狼，”他告诉父亲，“三只公的，两只母的。”
“What of it, Jon?”
“琼恩，这有什么意义吗？”
“You have five trueborn children,” Jon said. “Three sons, two daughters. The direwolf is the sigil of your House. Your children were meant to have these pups, my lord.”
“您有五个孩子，”琼恩回答，“三个儿子，两个女儿。冰原狼又是你们的家徽，大人，您的孩子们注定要拥有这些小狼。”
Bran saw his father’s face change, saw the other men exchange glances. He loved Jon with all his heart at that moment. Even at seven, Bran understood what his brother had done. The count had come right only because Jon had omitted himself. He had included the girls, included even Rickon, the baby, but not the bastard who bore the surname Snow, the name that custom decreed be given to all those in the north unlucky enough to be born with no name of their own.
布兰看到父亲的脸色转变，其他人则交换眼神，就在那一刻，他全身心地爱着琼恩。虽然他只有七岁，布兰仍很清楚自己的私生子哥哥这样做所代表的意义：他是把自己排除在父亲的子嗣之外，才会刚好凑成数的。他把两个女孩算了进去，甚至连襁褓中的小瑞肯也有分，却独独没有算冠着雪诺这个私生子姓氏的自己。雪诺这个姓氏是专门给那些在北方出生，却不幸没有父亲的人用的。
Their father understood as well. “You want no pup for yourself, Jon?” he asked softly.
父亲也明白这点。“琼恩，你自己不想要小狼么？”他轻声问。
“The direwolf graces the banners of House Stark,” Jon pointed out. “I am no Stark, Father.”
“冰原狼是史塔克家族的纹章，”琼恩指出，“我并非史塔克家族的一员，父亲。”
Their lord father regarded Jon thoughtfully. Robb rushed into the silence he left. “I will nurse him myself, Father,” he promised. “I will soak a towel with warm milk, and give him suck from that.”
父亲若有所思地看了琼恩一眼，罗柏急切地打破沉默，“父亲，我会亲自喂养小狼。”他保证，“我会用浸过温牛奶的湿毛巾喂它。”
“Me too!” Bran echoed.
“我也会！”布兰连忙跟进。
The lord weighed his sons long and carefully with his eyes. “Easy to say, and harder to do. I will not have you wasting the servants’ time with this. If you want these pups, you will feed them yourselves. Is that understood?”
公爵意味深长地审视儿子，“说起来简单，真要做可不容易。我不会让你们占用仆人的时间。假如你们真要养这群小狼，就得一切自己来，知道么？”
Bran nodded eagerly. The pup squirmed in his grasp, licked at his face with a warm tongue.
布兰热切地连连点头，小狼蜷缩在他怀里，伸出温热的舌头舔舔他的脸颊。
“You must train them as well,” their father said. “You must train them. The kennelmaster will have nothing to do with these monsters, I promise you that. And the gods help you if you neglect them, or brutalize them, or train them badly. These are not dogs to beg for treats and slink off at a kick. A direwolf will rip a man’s arm off his shoulder as easily as a dog will kill a rat. Are you sure you want this?”
“你们还得亲自训练它们，”父亲又道：“我保证驯兽长和这些怪物将毫无干系。倘若你们把它们练得残忍成性，或有什么闪失，那么祈祷天上诸神保佑吧。这些可不是讨好卖乖的狗，也不是随便踢一脚就能打发的角色。冰原狼要扯下胳膊就和狗杀老鼠一样简单，你们确定要养么？”
“Yes, Father,” Bran said.
“是的，父亲大人。”布兰答道。
“Yes,” Robb agreed.
“嗯。”罗柏同意。
“The pups may die anyway, despite all you do.”
“即使你们费尽苦心，小狼还是有夭折的可能”。
“They won’t die,” Robb said. “We won’t let them die.”
“不会，”罗柏说：“我们不会让它们死掉。”
“Keep them, then. Jory, Desmond, gather up the other pups. It’s time we were back to Winterfell.”
“那就留着它们罢。乔里，戴斯蒙，把其他几只小狼带上，我们该回临冬城了。”
It was not until they were mounted and on their way that Bran allowed himself to taste the sweet air of victory. By then, his pup was snuggled inside his leathers, warm against him, safe for the long ride home. Bran was wondering what to name him.
一直到他们骑马踏上归途，布兰方才允许自己享受胜利的喜悦。他的小狼此刻正安全地藏靠在他的皮护甲里，他不禁思索该为它取个什么名字才好。
Halfway across the bridge, Jon pulled up suddenly.
走到桥中央，琼恩突然勒住马缰。
“What is it, Jon?” their lord father asked.
“琼恩，怎么了？”公爵父亲问。
“Can’t you hear it?”
“你们没听到么？”
Bran could hear the wind in the trees, the clatter of their hooves on the ironwood planks, the whimpering of his hungry pup, but Jon was listening to something else.
布兰只听见林间风声和哒哒马蹄，以及怀间嗷嗷待哺的小狼，但琼恩正侧耳倾听别的事物。
“There,” Jon said. He swung his horse around and galloped back across the bridge. They watched him dismount where the direwolf lay dead in the snow, watched him kneel. A moment later he was riding back to them, smiling.
“在那里。”琼恩道，他掉转马头，急驰过桥，大家看着他在母狼尸体旁下马，屈膝跪下，一会儿过后又骑马归来，满面笑容。
“He must have crawled away from the others,” Jon said.
“这只一定是先爬开了。”琼恩说。
“Or been driven away,” their father said, looking at the sixth pup. His fur was white, where the rest of the litter was grey. His eyes were as red as the blood of the ragged man who had died that morning. Bran thought it curious that this pup alone would have opened his eyes while the others were still blind.
“或是被赶开的。”他们的父亲看着第六只小狼说。它毛色净白，其他的小狼则多半灰黑，它的眼瞳红如早上死囚的鲜血。布兰很觉好奇，不知为何其他小狼连眼睛都还没睁开，惟独它双目炯炯有神。
“An albino,” Theon Greyjoy said with wry amusement. “This one will die even faster than the others.”
“白子，”席恩·葛雷乔伊话里有种兴味十足的讥讽，“只怕这只会死得最快。”
Jon Snow gave his father’s ward a long, chilling look. “I think not, Greyjoy,” he said. “This one belongs to me.”
琼恩·雪诺给了他父亲的养子一个意味深长的冷绝凝视，“葛雷乔伊，我可不这么认为。”他答道，“因为这是我的狼。”
*CATELYN
第三章 凯特琳
C atelyn had never liked this godswood.
凯特琳向来不喜欢这座神木林。
She had been born a Tully, at Riverrun far to the south, on the Red Fork of the Trident. The godswood there was a garden, bright and airy, where tall redwoods spread dappled shadows across tinkling streams, birds sang from hidden nests, and the air was spicy with the scent of flowers.
她出身南境的徒利家族，自小在红叉河畔的奔流城长大。红叉河是三叉戟河的支流，那里的神木林是座明亮清朗的花园，高大的红木树影洒进溪涧，鸟儿在栖隐的林间巢穴里高唱，空气中弥漫百花馨香。
The gods of Winterfell kept a different sort of wood. It was a dark, primal place, three acres of old forest untouched for ten thousand years as the gloomy castle rose around it. It smelled of moist earth and decay. No redwoods grew here. This was a wood of stubborn sentinel trees armored in grey-green needles, of mighty oaks, of ironwoods as old as the realm itself. Here thick black trunks crowded close together while twisted branches wove a dense canopy overhead and misshapen roots wrestled beneath the soil. This was a place of deep silence and brooding shadows, and the gods who lived here had no names.
临冬城信仰的则是另一番气象。这是个阴暗原始的地方，昏暝古堡巍然独立其间，万年古木横亘周边，散发出潮湿和腐败的气味。此地不生红木，树林由披戴灰绿松针的哨兵树、壮实的橡树，以及与王国同样苍老的铁树所组成。在这里，粗壮厚实的黑色树干相互攘挤，扭曲的枝在头顶织就一片浓密的参天树顶，变形的错节盘根则在地底彼此角力。这是个属于深沉寂静和窒郁暗影的地方，而蛰居其间的神连名字也付之阙如。
But she knew she would find her husband here tonight. Whenever he took a man’s life, afterward he would seek the quiet of the godswood.
但她知道今晚可以在这里找到丈夫。每当他取人性命后，总会来此觅求神木林的宁静。
Catelyn had been anointed with the seven oils and named in the rainbow of light that filled the sept of Riverrun. She was of the Faith, like her father and grandfather and his father before him. Her gods had names, and their faces were as familiar as the faces of her parents. Worship was a septon with a censer, the smell of incense, a seven-sided crystal alive with light, voices raised in song. The Tullys kept a godswood, as all the great houses did, but it was only a place to walk or read or lie in the sun. Worship was for the sept.
凯特琳身受七种圣油祝福与加持，命名仪式乃是在浸沐于七彩虹光的奔流城圣堂里举行的。她和先辈数代一样信仰七神。她信奉的神有名有姓，脸庞也如同自己双亲般熟悉。她在香炉冉冉的圣堂里祷告，燃香气味弥漫，指引的修士挂着光芒共生的七面水晶，喃喃地低声吟唱。徒利家族虽如其他大家贵族般拥有自己的神木林，但那只不过是个散步阅读或在暖阳下休憩的处所，敬拜神明向来是圣堂里的事。
For her sake, Ned had built a small sept where she might sing to the seven faces of god, but the blood of the First Men still flowed in the veins of the Starks, and his own gods were the old ones, the nameless, faceless gods of the greenwood they shared with the vanished children of the forest.
奈德为她建了座小圣堂，好让她有个向七面之神诵唱的地方。然而史塔克家族体内依旧流淌着“先民”的血液，他信奉那些既无名号亦无容貌的远古诸神，那些属于苍翠树林，先民与消失的森林之子共同信仰的神。
At the center of the grove an ancient weirwood brooded over a small pool where the waters were black and cold. “The heart tree,” Ned called it. The weirwood’s bark was white as bone, its leaves dark red, like a thousand bloodstained hands. A face had been carved in the trunk of the great tree, its features long and melancholy, the deep-cut eyes red with dried sap and strangely watchful. They were old, those eyes; older than Winterfell itself. They had seen Brandon the Builder set the first stone, if the tales were true; they had watched the castle’s granite walls rise around them. It was said that the children of the forest had carved the faces in the trees during the dawn centuries before the coming of the First Men across the narrow sea.
林子中央有棵古老的鱼梁木，笼罩着一泓黑冷池水，奈德称之为“心树”。鱼梁木的树皮灰白如骨，叶色深红，有如千只染血手掌。树干上刻了一张人脸，容貌深长而忧郁，满是干涸红树汁的深陷眼凹形容怪异、充满警戒意味。那是一双古老的眼睛，比临冬城本身还要古老，它们曾经目睹“筑城者”布兰登安下第一块基石，倘若传说属实，它们也见证了城堡的大理石墙在四周逐渐高筑。传说这些脸是在黎明纪元时，在“先民”渡过狭海而来之前，由森林之子刻上去的。
In the south the last weirwoods had been cut down or burned out a thousand years ago, except on the Isle of Faces where the green men kept their silent watch. Up here it was different. Here every castle had its godswood, and every godswood had its heart tree, and every heart tree its face.
南方的鱼梁木早在千年前便遭砍伐焚烧殆尽，只在千面屿上还有“绿人”静静地看守。然而在北境一切都迥然不同，这里每一座城堡都有自己的神木林，每片神木林都有一棵心树，每棵心树都有一张人脸。
Catelyn found her husband beneath the weirwood, seated on a moss-covered stone. The greatsword Ice was across his lap, and he was cleaning the blade in those waters black as night. A thousand years of humus lay thick upon the godswood floor, swallowing the sound of her feet, but the red eyes of the weirwood seemed to follow her as she came. “Ned,” she called softly.
凯特琳在鱼梁木下找到了她的丈夫，他静坐在苔藓爬盖的磐石上。宝剑“寒冰”斜躺于膝，而他正用那漆黑如永夜的池水清洗剑上血污。千年累积的腐植质厚厚地覆盖在神木林的土地上，吸走了她的足音，但鱼梁木那双红眼却仿佛紧跟不舍。“奈德①。”她轻声唤道。
He lifted his head to look at her. “Catelyn,” he said. His voice was distant and formal. “Where are the children?”
他抬起头看着她。“凯特琳，”他的语调庄重而遥远。“孩子们呢？”
He would always ask her that. “In the kitchen, arguing about names for the wolf pups.” She spread her cloak on the forest floor and sat beside the pool, her back to the weirwood. She could feel the eyes watching her, but she did her best to ignore them. “Arya is already in love, and Sansa is charmed and gracious, but Rickon is not quite sure.”
他总是会先问这句。“都在厨房里，为了要帮小狼们取些什么名字正吵架呢。”她把披风铺在林地上，然后在池边坐下，背靠鱼梁木。她感觉得到那双眼睛正盯着自己看，但她竭尽所能去忽略它。“艾莉亚已经爱得发狂，珊莎也很喜欢，瑞肯则还不太确定。”
“Is he afraid?” Ned asked.
“他害怕吗？”奈德问。
“A little,” she admitted. “He is only three.”
“有一点，”她承认，“毕竟他才三岁。”。
Ned frowned. “He must learn to face his fears. He will not be three forever. And winter is coming.”
奈德皱眉：“他得学着面对自己的恐惧，他不可能永远都是三岁，更何况凛冬将至。”
“Yes,” Catelyn agreed. The words gave her a chill, as they always did. The Stark words. Every noble house had its words. Family mottoes, touchstones, prayers of sorts, they boasted of honor and glory, promised loyalty and truth, swore faith and courage. All but the Starks. Winter is coming , said the Stark words. Not for the first time, she reflected on what a strange people these northerners were.
“是啊，”凯特琳也同意，最后那句话一如既往地教她不寒而栗。这是史塔克家族的铭言，每一个贵族家族都有着自己的箴言警句：或是世代相传的座右铭，或是待人处事的衡量标准，或是针对困境的祷词；有的夸耀荣誉，有些讲究忠贞诚信，还有的为信仰和勇气宣誓，惟独史塔克家族例外。凛冬将至，史塔克家族的铭言如是说。她已经不只一次在心里暗忖：这些北方人究竟是什么样的一群怪人。
“The man died well, I’ll give him that,” Ned said. He had a swatch of oiled leather in one hand. He ran it lightly up the greatsword as he spoke, polishing the metal to a dark glow. “I was glad for Bran’s sake. You would have been proud of Bran.”
“今天那个人死得很干脆，这一点我承认。”奈德说，他手里握了一块上了油的皮革，边说边轻拭剑身，金属被逐渐磨出暗沉的光泽。“我很为布兰高兴，你要是在场，也会为他骄傲的。”
“I am always proud of Bran,” Catelyn replied, watching the sword as he stroked it. She could see the rippling deep within the steel, where the metal had been folded back on itself a hundred times in the forging. Catelyn had no love for swords, but she could not deny that Ice had its own beauty. It had been forged in Valyria, before the Doom had come to the old Freehold, when the ironsmiths had worked their metal with spells as well as hammers. Four hundred years old it was, and as sharp as the day it was forged. The name it bore was older still, a legacy from the age of heroes, when the Starks were Kings in the North.
“我向来都很为他骄傲。”凯特琳边看他拭剑边答道，她可以瞧见钢铁深处的波纹，那是锻冶时千锤百炼的印记。凯特琳对刀剑素无好感，但她不能否认“寒冰”确有其独特的美。它是末日浩劫降临古自由堡垒以前，在瓦雷利亚锻造而成，当时的铁匠不仅用凿锤冶铁，更用法术来形塑金属。宝剑已有四百年历史，却仍旧如它锻冶初成时那般锋利。它的名字则更源远流长，乃是袭自古代英雄纪元时的族剑之名，那时史塔克一族是北境之王。
“He was the fourth this year,” Ned said grimly. “The poor man was half-mad. Something had put a fear in him so deep that my words could not reach him.” He sighed. “Ben writes that the strength of the Night’s Watch is down below a thousand. It’s not only desertions. They are losing men on rangings as well.”
“这已经是今年第四个逃兵了，”奈德沉着脸说，“那个可怜的家伙已经疯了一半，不知什么东西把他吓成那副德行，连我说话都起不了作用。”他叹口气，“班写信来说守夜人的兵力只剩不到一千，不只因为逃兵，他们派出去的巡逻队也损失惨重。”
“Is it the wildlings?” she asked.
“是野人的关系吗？”她问。
“Who else?” Ned lifted Ice, looked down the cool steel length of it. “And it will only grow worse. The day may come when I will have no choice but to call the banners and ride north to deal with this King-beyond-the-Wall for good and all.”
“还会有谁呢？”奈德举起“寒冰”，俯首审视手中冰冷的钢铁。“恐怕情况只会越来越糟，也许我真的别无选择，非得召集封臣，率军北进，与这个绝境长城以外的国王一决生死。”
“Beyond the Wall?” The thought made Catelyn shudder.
“绝境长城以外？”凯特琳想到就不禁浑身颤抖。
Ned saw the dread on her face. “Mance Rayder is nothing for us to fear.”
奈德察觉了她脸上的恐惧。“我们用不着害怕曼斯·雷德。”
“There are darker things beyond the Wall.” She glanced behind her at the heart tree, the pale bark and red eyes, watching, listening, thinking its long slow thoughts.
“长城之外还有更可怕的东西。”她转过头去，看着心树惨白的树皮和赭红的双眼，凝视、倾听、考虑着深邃悠远的思绪。
His smile was gentle. “You listen to too many of Old Nan’s stories. The Others are as dead as the children of the forest, gone eight thousand years. Maester Luwin will tell you they never lived at all. No living man has ever seen one.”
他的微笑好温柔。“老奶妈的故事你听太多啦。异鬼和森林之子一样，早已经消失了八千多年。鲁温师傅会告诉你他们根本就没存在过，没有活人见过他们。”
“Until this morning, no living man had ever seen a direwolf either,” Catelyn reminded him.
“今天早上之前，不也没人见过冰原狼？”凯特琳提醒他。
“I ought to know better than to argue with a Tully,” he said with a rueful smile. He slid Ice back into its sheath. “You did not come here to tell me crib tales. I know how little you like this place. What is it, my lady?”
“我怎么也说不过徒利家的人，”他嘴角浮起一抹后悔的微笑，将“寒冰”收回剑鞘。“我猜你不是跑来跟我聊睡前故事的，何况我知道你一点也不喜欢这个地方。究竟是什么事，我的好夫人？”
Catelyn took her husband’s hand. “There was grievous news today, my lord. I did not wish to trouble you until you had cleansed yourself.” There was no way to soften the blow, so she told him straight. “I am so sorry, my love. Jon Arryn is dead.”
凯特琳握住丈夫的手。“今天我们接获了悲伤的消息，大人，我不想在你清理宝剑之前打扰你。”既然无法减轻伤害，她决定实话实说。“亲爱的，我很难过，琼恩·艾林过世了。”
His eyes found hers, and she could see how hard it took him, as she had known it would. In his youth, Ned had fostered at the Eyrie, and the childless Lord Arryn had become a second father to him and his fellow ward, Robert Baratheon. When the Mad King Aerys II Targaryen had demanded their heads, the Lord of the Eyrie had raised his moon-and-falcon banners in revolt rather than give up those he had pledged to protect.
他们视线相对，她可以清楚地看见他受的打击有多大，正如她所预料。奈德年轻时曾在鹰巢城做过养子，而膝下无子的艾林公爵待他和另一名养子劳勃·拜拉席恩有如生父再世。当疯王伊里斯·坦格利安二世要求他交出两人的项上人头时，这位鹰巢城公爵揭起他的新月猎鹰旗，宁可兴兵发难也不愿出卖他誓言守护的人。
And one day fifteen years ago, this second father had become a brother as well, as he and Ned stood together in the sept at Riverrun to wed two sisters, the daughters of Lord Hoster Tully.
而就在十五年前的那一天，这位再世生父又成了奈德的连襟。他们俩并肩站在奔流城的圣堂里，娶了一对姐妹，也就是霍斯特·徒利公爵的两个女儿。
“Jon …” he said. “Is this news certain?”
“琼恩……”他说，“这消息确实么？”
“It was the king’s seal, and the letter is in Robert’s own hand. I saved it for you. He said Lord Arryn was taken quickly. Even Maester Pycelle was helpless, but he brought the milk of the poppy, so Jon did not linger long in pain.”
“信上有国王的印鉴，且是劳勃亲手书写。他说艾林公爵走得很仓促，就连派席尔国师也束手无策。不过国师给他喝了罂粟花奶，所以琼恩并没受太多折磨。”
“That is some small mercy, I suppose,” he said. She could see the grief on his face, but even then he thought first of her. “Your sister,” he said. “And Jon’s boy. What word of them?”
“我想这也算是最后的一点慈悲。”他说，她看见他脸上的悲伤，但他最先想到的还是她。“你妹妹，”他问，“还有琼恩的儿子，有他们的消息吗？”。
“The message said only that they were well, and had returned to the Eyrie,” Catelyn said. “I wish they had gone to Riverrun instead. The Eyrie is high and lonely, and it was ever her husband’s place, not hers. Lord Jon’s memory will haunt each stone. I know my sister. She needs the comfort of family and friends around her.”
“信上只说他们安然无恙，并已返回了鹰巢城。”凯特琳说，“我真希望他们回的是奔流城。鹰巢城高耸孤绝，那里一直是她丈夫的地盘，并非她的归宿。琼恩大人的回忆肯定会萦绕鹰巢城里每一块砖石。我很了解妹妹，她需要的是家人和朋友的支持与陪伴。”
“Your uncle waits in the Vale, does he not? Jon named him Knight of the Gate, I’d heard.”
“你叔叔不是正在艾林谷中等着她？我听说琼恩任命他做了血门骑士。”
Catelyn nodded. “Brynden will do what he can for her, and for the boy. That is some comfort, but still …”
凯特琳点点头，“布林登当然会尽他所能照顾她和她儿子，可是……”
“Go to her,” Ned urged. “Take the children. Fill her halls with noise and shouts and laughter. That boy of hers needs other children about him, and Lysa should not be alone in her grief.”
“那么你去陪她吧，”奈德劝促，“把孩子们也一起带去，让她的居所充满欢笑和喧闹。那孩子需要其他同伴的陪伴，你妹妹更不应该独自哀悼。”
“Would that I could,” Catelyn said. “The letter had other tidings. The king is riding to Winterfell to seek you out.”
“如果我能去就好了。”凯特琳说道：“信上还说到别的事，国王正在前往临冬城的路上，他要找你共商国事。”
It took Ned a moment to comprehend her words, but when the understanding came, the darkness left his eyes. “Robert is coming here?” When she nodded, a smile broke across his face.
奈德好一会儿才理解她话中含义，但当他恍然大悟时，眼中阴霾顿时一扫而空。“劳勃要来？”她点点头，他脸上随即绽开一抹微笑。
Catelyn wished she could share his joy. But she had heard the talk in the yards; a direwolf dead in the snow, a broken antler in its throat. Dread coiled within her like a snake, but she forced herself to smile at this man she loved, this man who put no faith in signs. “I knew that would please you,” she said. “We should send word to your brother on the Wall.”
凯特琳真希望自己能分享他此刻的喜悦，但她在庭院里听到了传闻，说是有只冰原狼死在雪地里，喉咙中有根断裂的鹿角。恐惧如同毒蛇般在她心里蜷曲，但她迫使自己在这个她所深爱的男人面前强颜欢笑，这个不相信任何预兆的男人。“我就知道你听了会高兴，”她说，“我们应该通知你在长城的弟弟。”
“Yes, of course,” he agreed. “Ben will want to be here. I shall tell Maester Luwin to send his swiftest bird.” Ned rose and pulled her to her feet. “Damnation, how many years has it been? And he gives us no more notice than this? How many in his party, did the message say?”
“对，对，当然，”他同意，“班一定想来。我请鲁温师傅派他最快的鸟儿送信去。”奈德直起身，也拉她起来。“该死，我们有多少年没见面了？他居然没有特意通知我。信上有否注明大约有多少人会来？”
“I should think a hundred knights, at the least, with all their retainers, and half again as many freeriders. Cersei and the children travel with them.”
“我想至少有一百位骑士罢，加上他们的随从，还有这个数目一半的自由骑手。瑟曦和她的孩子们也都来了。”
“Robert will keep an easy pace for their sakes,” he said. “It is just as well. That will give us more time to prepare.”
“那么为他们着想，劳勃不会走太快的。”他说：“也好，这样一来我们才多点时间准备。”
“The queen’s brothers are also in the party,” she told him.
“王后的哥哥也在队伍里。”她告诉他。
Ned grimaced at that. There was small love between him and the queen’s family, Catelyn knew. The Lannisters of Casterly Rock had come late to Robert’s cause, when victory was all but certain, and he had never forgiven them. “Well, if the price for Robert’s company is an infestation of Lannisters, so be it. It sounds as though Robert is bringing half his court.”
奈德听后脸色立刻一沉。凯特琳很清楚他对王后的家族素无好感，凯岩城的兰尼斯特家族当年是最晚加入劳勃势力的大贵族，直等到胜败情势明朗化后方才表态，而奈德始终没有原谅他们。“也罢，如果劳勃来访的代价是这些兰尼斯特家的讨厌鬼，那就认了罢。只是，听起来劳勃好像把他半个宫廷的人都带来了。”
“Where the king goes, the realm follows,” she said.
“国王走到哪儿，王国就跟到哪儿嘛。”她答道。
“It will be good to see the children. The youngest was still sucking at the Lannister woman’s teat the last time I saw him. He must be, what, five by now?”
“看看那些孩子倒也不错。上次见到那个兰尼斯特女人，劳勃最小的儿子还在喝她的奶水。一转眼都几年了？他现在应该已经……多少……五岁了吧？”
“Prince Tommen is seven,” she told him. “The same age as Bran. Please, Ned, guard your tongue. The Lannister woman is our queen, and her pride is said to grow with every passing year.”
“托曼王子七岁了，”她告诉他，“和布兰同年。奈德，请你小心措辞，那兰尼斯特女人好歹是我们的王后，而且据说她一年比一年傲慢。”
Ned squeezed her hand. “There must be a feast, of course, with singers, and Robert will want to hunt. I shall send Jory south with an honor guard to meet them on the kingsroad and escort them back. Gods, how are we going to feed them all? On his way already, you said? Damn the man. Damn his royal hide.”
奈德捏捏她的手，“我们得办场晚宴，当然还要请乐师和歌手，嗯，劳勃铁定会去外面打猎。我这就派乔里带上一名荣誉护卫南下国王大道去迎接，把他们护送回来吧。诸神在上，我们要怎么喂饱这些人啊？你说他已经在路上了？这家伙真该死，他这做国王的家伙真是该死。”
*DAENERYS
第四章 丹妮莉丝
H er brother held the gown up for her inspection.
哥哥举起长袍给她看。“真漂亮，你摸摸，没关系，你瞧瞧这料子。”
“This is beauty. Touch it. Go on. Caress the fabric.”
丹妮摸了摸，衣料柔软如水，流过她的手指，她从没穿过这么柔软的衣服。她突然害怕了起来，连忙抽回手。“这真是给我的么？”
Dany touched it. The cloth was so smooth that it seemed to run through her fingers like water. She could not remember ever wearing anything so soft. It frightened her. She pulled her hand away. “Is it really mine?”
“这是伊利里欧总督送的礼物，”韦赛里斯微笑道。哥哥今晚心情很好。“袍子的颜色刚好衬出你紫罗兰色的眼睛。你还要配戴金饰，以及各式各样的珠宝玉石，今晚你看起来必须有个公主的样子。”
“A gift from the Magister Illyrio,” Viserys said, smiling. Her brother was in a high mood tonight. “The color will bring out the violet in your eyes. And you shall have gold as well, and jewels of all sorts. Illyrio has promised. Tonight you must look like a princess.”
有个公主的样子，丹妮想着。她早已忘记那是什么样子了，也许她根本就不知道。“他为什么对我们这么好？”她问，“他想从我们这里得到什么好处？”过去近半年来，他们吃住都靠这位总督，在他的仆佣伺候下恃宠而骄。丹妮今年十三岁，已经懂得这种优渥的待遇不会凭空而来，尤其是在潘托斯这样的自由贸易城邦。
A princess , Dany thought. She had forgotten what that was like. Perhaps she had never really known. “Why does he give us so much?” she asked. “What does he want from us?” For nigh on half a year, they had lived in the magister’s house, eating his food, pampered by his servants. Dany was thirteen, old enough to know that such gifts seldom come without their price, here in the free city of Pentos.
“伊利里欧可不笨，”韦赛里斯回答，他是个削瘦的年轻人，双手局促不安，泛白的淡紫色眼瞳里有种狂热的神色。“他知道有朝一日当我重登王位，不会忘记曾经雪中送炭的朋友。”
“Illyrio is no fool,” Viserys said. He was a gaunt young man with nervous hands and a feverish look in his pale lilac eyes. “The magister knows that I will not forget my friends when I come into my throne.”
丹妮没有答话。伊利里欧总督是个商人，专做香料、宝石和龙骨买卖，还有其他见不得人的勾当。据说他交游广泛，不仅遍布九个自由贸易城邦，更远至东方的维斯·多斯拉克，以及玉海沿岸的传奇之地。又有人说，只要开得出价钱，任何朋友他都乐于出卖。这些话丹妮都静静地听了进去，但她知道最好不要在兄长编织迷梦时戳破。韦赛里斯一旦生气起来非常骇人，他称之为“唤醒睡龙之怒”。
Dany said nothing. Magister Illyrio was a dealer in spices, gemstones, dragonbone, and other, less savory things. He had friends in all of the Nine Free Cities, it was said, and even beyond, in Vaes Dothrak and the fabled lands beside the Jade Sea. It was also said that he’d never had a friend he wouldn’t cheerfully sell for the right price. Dany listened to the talk in the streets, and she heard these things, but she knew better than to question her brother when he wove his webs of dream. His anger was a terrible thing when roused. Viserys called it “waking the dragon.”
哥哥把袍子挂在门边。“伊利里欧会派奴隶前来伺候你沐浴，记得把身上的马臊味洗掉。卓戈卡奥①虽有千百良驹，但他今晚要骑的可是另一种马。”他仔细端详着她，“你还是弯腰驼背的老样子，要抬头挺胸。”他伸手把她的肩膀往后挺。“让他们知道你已经有女人的形态了。”他的手指微微掠扫过她正开始发育的胸部，捏住一边乳头。“今晚你不许给我出丑，若是出了差错，以后可有你受的！你不想唤醒睡龙之怒吧？”他的手指越捏越紧，隔着粗料外衣她也疼痛难忍。“想不想？”他重复。
Her brother hung the gown beside the door. “Illyrio will send the slaves to bathe you. Be sure you wash off the stink of the stables. Khal Drogo has a thousand horses, tonight he looks for a different sort of mount.” He studied her critically. “You still slouch. Straighten yourself.” He pushed back her shoulders with his hands. “Let them see that you have a woman’s shape now.” His fingers brushed lightly over her budding breasts and tightened on a nipple. “You will not fail me tonight. If you do, it will go hard for you. You don’t want to wake the dragon, do you?” His fingers twisted her, the pinch cruelly hard through the rough fabric of her tunic. “Do you?” he repeated.
“不想。”丹妮怯弱地回答。
“No,” Dany said meekly.
哥哥笑了，“很好，”他爱怜地轻抚她的秀发，“将来史家为我立传时，会说我的统治始自今夜。”
Her brother smiled. “Good.” He touched her hair, almost with affection. “When they write the history of my reign, sweet sister, they will say that it began tonight.”
他离开后，丹妮走到窗边，思慕地望着海湾。潘托斯的方砖高塔是斜阳残照里的黑色剪影，丹妮可以听见红袍僧点燃夜火时的诵唱祝祷，以及高墙外孩童玩耍的笑闹喧哗。就在那一刹那，她好希望自己能在外面和他们一起赤足嬉戏，穿着破烂衣裳喘着粗气：没有过去，没有未来，也不用参加卓戈卡奥的宅邸晚宴。
When he was gone, Dany went to her window and looked out wistfully on the waters of the bay. The square brick towers of Pentos were black silhouettes outlined against the setting sun. Dany could hear the singing of the red priests as they lit their night fires and the shouts of ragged children playing games beyond the walls of the estate. For a moment she wished she could be out there with them, barefoot and breathless and dressed in tatters, with no past and no future and no feast to attend at Khal Drogo’s manse.
在夕阳狭海的对岸，有个青陵纵横、花开平野、深河奔涌的地方，那里有高耸于壮丽灰蓝峰峦间的黑石巨塔，有高举鲜明旗帜赶赴沙场的铁甲武士。多斯拉克人称之为“雷叙·安达里”，意思是“安达尔人之地”。在自由贸易城邦里，人们呼其为“维斯特洛”和“日落国度”。而哥哥有个更简单的说法，他称之为“我们的土地”。这个名字就像句祷词，仿佛只要他挂在嘴边，就定能上达天听。“那是我们真龙血脉所继承的土地，虽然遭阴谋诡计所夺，但仍然属于我们，永远属于我们。没人能从真龙手中偷走东西，门儿都没有，因为真龙凡事都永远记得。”
Somewhere beyond the sunset, across the narrow sea, lay a land of green hills and flowered plains and great rushing rivers, where towers of dark stone rose amidst magnificent blue-grey mountains, and armored knights rode to battle beneath the banners of their lords. The Dothraki called that land Rhaesh Andahli , the land of the Andals. In the Free Cities, they talked of Westeros and the Sunset Kingdoms. Her brother had a simpler name. “Our land,” he called it. The words were like a prayer with him. If he said them enough, the gods were sure to hear. “Ours by blood right, taken from us by treachery, but ours still, ours forever. You do not steal from the dragon, oh, no. The dragon remembers.”
也许真龙记得罢，只是丹妮却记不得。那块位于狭海对岸，哥哥信誓旦旦属于他们的土地，她从来没有见过。那些他口中的名字：凯岩城、鹰巢城、高庭和艾林谷，多恩领和千面屿等，对她来说不过是文字的拼凑罢了。当年他们躲避节节进逼的“篡夺者”军队，被迫逃离君临时，韦赛里斯还是个八岁大的男孩，而丹妮只不过是母亲子宫里胎动的血肉。
And perhaps the dragon did remember, but Dany could not. She had never seen this land her brother said was theirs, this realm beyond the narrow sea. These places he talked of, Casterly Rock and the Eyrie, Highgarden and the Vale of Arryn, Dorne and the Isle of Faces, they were just words to her. Viserys had been a boy of eight when they fled King’s Landing to escape the advancing armies of the Usurper, but Daenerys had been only a quickening in their mother’s womb.
然而哥哥的故事听得多了，丹妮有时还是会在脑海里自行拼凑出过往的光景：母后他们乘着船影黑帆，在当空皓月下夜奔龙石岛；她的长兄雷加在染血的三叉戟河上与篡夺者殊死决斗，为他心爱的女人丧命；兰尼斯特和史塔克家族的部众，那些被韦赛里斯称做篡夺者走狗的队伍，洗劫君临；多恩的伊莉亚公主苦苦哀求，却眼睁睁地看着她和雷加的亲生骨肉，那个还在她胸脯上吸吮母奶的婴儿，被硬生生夺走，血淋淋地惨死；那些悬挂于王座大厅后方高墙上，末裔巨龙的亮磨头骨，用瞎盲的空洞眼窟看着“弑君者”拿起金色宝剑，切开父王的喉咙。
Yet sometimes Dany would picture the way it had been, so often had her brother told her the stories. The midnight flight to Dragonstone, moonlight shimmering on the ship’s black sails. Her brother Rhaegar battling the Usurper in the bloody waters of the Trident and dying for the woman he loved. The sack of King’s Landing by the ones Viserys called the Usurper’s dogs, the lords Lannister and Stark. Princess Elia of Dorne pleading for mercy as Rhaegar’s heir was ripped from her breast and murdered before her eyes. The polished skulls of the last dragons staring down sightlessly from the walls of the throne room while the Kingslayer opened Father’s throat with a golden sword.
逃亡之后九个月，她降生于龙石岛，时值夏季暴风来袭，仿佛要把城堡撕成碎片。据说那场暴风雨骇人无比，停泊在军港的坦格利安王家舰队被摧毁殆尽，巨石自城垛上崩落，朝海峡疯狂翻涌的潮水腾滚而去。她的母亲难产而死，为此韦赛里斯始终没有原谅她。
She had been born on Dragonstone nine moons after their flight, while a raging summer storm threatened to rip the island fastness apart. They said that storm was terrible. The Targaryen fleet was smashed while it lay at anchor, and huge stone blocks were ripped from the parapets and sent hurtling into the wild waters of the narrow sea. Her mother had died birthing her, and for that her brother Viserys had never forgiven her.
然而她也不记得龙石岛。就在“篡夺者”弟弟的舰队初成，率众来伐的前夕，他们继续亡命天涯。当时原本属于他们的七大王国②之中，只剩下他们历史悠久的家族堡垒龙石岛尚未落入敌人手中。而就连这样的情形也维持不了多久，城中守军早已暗中计划把他们出卖给“篡夺者”。但某天夜里，威廉·戴瑞爵士带着四位死士杀进育婴房，把他们连同奶妈一起带走，在夜幕掩护下纵帆驶往布拉佛斯的海岸。
She did not remember Dragonstone either. They had run again, just before the Usurper’s brother set sail with his new-built fleet. By then only Dragonstone itself, the ancient seat of their House, had remained of the Seven Kingdoms that had once been theirs. It would not remain for long. The garrison had been prepared to sell them to the Usurper, but one night Ser Willem Darry and four loyal men had broken into the nursery and stolen them both, along with her wet nurse, and set sail under cover of darkness for the safety of the Braavosian coast.
她只依稀记得威廉·戴瑞爵士，他是个魁梧的灰胡壮汉，纵使后来眼睛半盲，还能从病榻上高声怒吼、发号施令。仆人们很怕他，但他待丹妮始终亲切慈蔼，唤她作“小公主”，有时则是“我的小姐”；他的双手犹如皮革般柔软。然而他始终没有离开病床，日夜被疾病的气息所缠绕，那是种湿热而恶心的甜味。当时他们住在布拉佛斯一栋有着红漆大门的房子里，丹妮有自己的房间，寝室窗外还有棵柠檬树。威廉爵士死后，仆人们把仅剩的一点钱全给偷走，没过多久他们便被逐出那栋宽敞红屋。当红漆大门为他们永远关闭时，丹妮再也止不住眼泪。
She remembered Ser Willem dimly, a great grey bear of a man, half-blind, roaring and bellowing orders from his sickbed. The servants had lived in terror of him, but he had always been kind to Dany. He called her “Little Princess” and sometimes “My Lady,” and his hands were soft as old leather. He never left his bed, though, and the smell of sickness clung to him day and night, a hot, moist, sickly sweet odor. That was when they lived in Braavos, in the big house with the red door. Dany had her own room there, with a lemon tree outside her window. After Ser Willem had died, the servants had stolen what little money they had left, and soon after they had been put out of the big house. Dany had cried when the red door closed behind them forever.
从那之后，他们开始了流浪的岁月，从布拉佛斯到密尔，从密尔到泰洛西，后来又到过科霍尔、瓦兰提斯和里斯，漂泊无依，未曾在一处落脚扎根。哥哥不肯定居下来，他总说“篡夺者”派来的杀手紧追在后，然而丹妮却连半个刺客也没见着。
They had wandered since then, from Braavos to Myr, from Myr to Tyrosh, and on to Qohor and Volantis and Lys, never staying long in any one place. Her brother would not allow it. The Usurper’s hired knives were close behind them, he insisted, though Dany had never seen one.
起初统治各自由贸易城邦的总督、大君和商界巨贾很乐于接待坦格利安后裔，但随着日子渐渐过去，“篡夺者”在铁王座上越坐越稳，原本为他们敞开的门便一扇扇关了起来，他们的日子也日益艰苦。几年来，他们当掉了所有的珠宝。到如今，连贩卖母亲的王冠所得的钱币也全部花光。在潘托斯的酒馆和巷弄里，人们给哥哥取了个外号叫“乞丐王”，丹妮不敢想像他们怎么称呼她。
At first the magisters and archons and merchant princes were pleased to welcome the last Targaryens to their homes and tables, but as the years passed and the Usurper continued to sit upon the Iron Throne, doors closed and their lives grew meaner. Years past they had been forced to sell their last few treasures, and now even the coin they had gotten from Mother’s crown had gone. In the alleys and wine sinks of Pentos, they called her brother “the beggar king.” Dany did not want to know what they called her.
“我的好妹妹，有朝一日我们定会收复故土。”韦赛里斯经常这么对她承诺，有时他边说手还会无法克制地颤抖。“想想那些珠宝丝绸，龙石岛和君临，铁王座和七大王国，全都从我们手中抢了过去，而我们通通会要回来的。”韦赛里斯之所以活着就是为了那一天的到来，丹妮却只想重回那栋有红漆大门的宅院，想要她窗外的那株柠檬树，还有她失去的童年。
“We will have it all back someday, sweet sister,” he would promise her. Sometimes his hands shook when he talked about it. “The jewels and the silks, Dragonstone and King’s Landing, the Iron Throne and the Seven Kingdoms, all they have taken from us, we will have it back.” Viserys lived for that day. All that Daenerys wanted back was the big house with the red door, the lemon tree outside her window, the childhood she had never known.
门上响起一阵轻敲。“进来。”窗边的丹妮回过神，伊利里欧的仆婢们走进屋内，鞠躬行礼，然后动手准备沐浴。他们皆为奴隶，是总督熟识的多斯拉克人酋长中某一位赠送的礼物。自由城邦潘托斯名义上没有奴隶制度，即便如此，握有实权的人们却能够逾越体例。那名瘦小而灰白如鼠的老妪总是不发一语，但另外那位年轻女孩正好弥补这个空缺。她是个金发碧眼的十六岁少女，也是伊利里欧最宠爱的奴婢，工作时总是喋喋不休。
There came a soft knock on her door. “Come,” Dany said, turning away from the window. Illyrio’s servants entered, bowed, and set about their business. They were slaves, a gift from one of the magister’s many Dothraki friends. There was no slavery in the free city of Pentos. Nonetheless, they were slaves. The old woman, small and grey as a mouse, never said a word, but the girl made up for it. She was Illyrio’s favorite, a fair-haired, blue-eyed wench of sixteen who chattered constantly as she worked.
她们在澡盆里放满从厨房提来的热水，洒进香油。女孩用条粗布巾裹住丹妮头发，搀扶她入浴。洗浴水滚烫无比，但丹妮莉丝没有吭声。她喜欢这种热，让她有干净的感觉。更何况哥哥常对她说，坦格利安家族的人是不怕烫的。“我们是真龙传人，”他常说：“血液里燃烧着熊熊烈焰。”
They filled her bath with hot water brought up from the kitchen and scented it with fragrant oils. The girl pulled the rough cotton tunic over Dany’s head and helped her into the tub. The water was scalding hot, but Daenerys did not flinch or cry out. She liked the heat. It made her feel clean. Besides, her brother had often told her that it was never too hot for a Targaryen. “Ours is the house of the dragon,” he would say. “The fire is in our blood.”
老妇人仔细地为她梳洗，把她银白色的秀发扎成辫子，默默理清纠结起来的发束。女孩则一边为她刷背洗脚，一边告诉她她有多么幸运。“听说卓戈家财万贯，连他奴隶的项圈都是金子做的。他的‘卡拉萨’③有十万名战士，他在维斯·多斯拉克城里的宫殿有两百个房间，还有用银子打造的门扉。”她说个不停，没完没了。她告诉丹妮，卡奥是多么英俊，多么高大凶猛，在战场上又是如何从不畏惧，说他不仅是有史以来最优秀的骑手，更是如恶魔般的神射手。丹妮莉丝从头到尾不发一语，她一直以为自己成年后嫁的人是韦赛里斯。自“征服者”伊耿娶两位妹妹为妻伊始，数百年来坦格利安王族成员向来是兄妹通婚。惟有如此，才能确保血脉纯正，这话韦赛里斯不知已经告诉过她多少遍了。他们体内流淌的是王者的血液，古老瓦雷利亚民族的金色血液，骄傲真龙的血液。真龙绝不和寻常野兽媾合，坦格利安族人自然更不会将他们的血液和下等人种混杂一起。然而现在韦赛里斯却打算把她卖给这个异乡的野蛮人。
The old woman washed her long, silver-pale hair and gently combed out the snags, all in silence. The girl scrubbed her back and her feet and told her how lucky she was. “Drogo is so rich that even his slaves wear golden collars. A hundred thousand men ride in his khalasar , and his palace in Vaes Dothrak has two hundred rooms and doors of solid silver.” There was more like that, so much more, what a handsome man the khal was, so tall and fierce, fearless in battle, the best rider ever to mount a horse, a demon archer. Daenerys said nothing. She had always assumed that she would wed Viserys when she came of age. For centuries the Targaryens had married brother to sister, since Aegon the Conqueror had taken his sisters to bride. The line must be kept pure, Viserys had told her a thousand times; theirs was the kingsblood, the golden blood of old Valyria, the blood of the dragon. Dragons did not mate with the beasts of the field, and Targaryens did not mingle their blood with that of lesser men. Yet now Viserys schemed to sell her to a stranger, a barbarian.
沐浴清净之后，女奴扶她起身，拿毛巾擦干她的躯体。女孩把她的头发梳理得亮如熔银，老妇则为她搽上原产多斯拉克草原的花草香精，两腕、耳后、乳尖、双唇和下体各轻触一抹；接着为她穿上伊利里欧总督送来的内衣，再罩上深紫丝袍，衬出她的紫罗兰色眼瞳。女孩为她套上金边凉鞋，老妪又为她戴上宝冠和镶着紫水晶的金手镯。最后才是黄金打造的厚重项圈，上面刻满古瓦雷利亚的符文。
When she was clean, the slaves helped her from the water and toweled her dry. The girl brushed her hair until it shone like molten silver, while the old woman anointed her with the spiceflower perfume of the Dothraki plains, a dab on each wrist, behind her ears, on the tips of her breasts, and one last one, cool on her lips, down there between her legs. They dressed her in the wisps that Magister Illyrio had sent up, and then the gown, a deep plum silk to bring out the violet in her eyes. The girl slid the gilded sandals onto her feet, while the old woman fixed the tiara in her hair, and slid golden bracelets crusted with amethysts around her wrists. Last of all came the collar, a heavy golden torc emblazoned with ancient Valyrian glyphs.
“这下你看起来总算有几分公主的模样了。”装扮完毕之后，女孩惊叹道。丹妮转身看看自己在镶银穿衣镜里的模样，镜子是伊利里欧殷勤提供的。有个公主的样子，她暗忖，忽然又想起女孩刚才说过的话，卓戈卡奥富可敌国，连他奴隶的项圈都是金子打造，不禁浑身发冷，鸡皮疙瘩冒了出来。
“Now you look all a princess,” the girl said breathlessly when they were done. Dany glanced at her image in the silvered looking glass that Illyrio had so thoughtfully provided. A princess , she thought, but she remembered what the girl had said, how Khal Drogo was so rich even his slaves wore golden collars. She felt a sudden chill, and gooseflesh pimpled her bare arms.
哥哥在阴凉的门厅里等她，他坐在池塘边，探手在水里晃悠。看到她来了他便站起身，带着评审意味地上下打量。“站过来，”他告诉她，“转过去，对，很好，你看起来……”
Her brother was waiting in the cool of the entry hall, seated on the edge of the pool, his hand trailing in the water. He rose when she appeared and looked her over critically. “Stand there,” he told her. “Turn around. Yes. Good. You look …”
“颇有王家风范。”伊利里欧总督从过道里走出，他虽臃肿肥胖，踏起步来却意外地轻盈优雅。随着脚步，他那一身肥肉在宽松的火红丝衣下不住晃动。他的每根指头都有宝石闪烁，仆人更为他的黄色八字胡擦了油，亮得仿若真金。“丹妮莉丝公主，愿您在这个黄道吉日里，得到光之王的所有祝福。”总督说罢牵起她的手，低头行礼，透过金色胡须，他露出满嘴黄牙。“王子殿下，就算是梦中佳人也不过如此啊。”他告诉哥哥，“卓戈一定会满意的。”
“Regal,” Magister Illyrio said, stepping through an archway. He moved with surprising delicacy for such a massive man. Beneath loose garments of flame-colored silk, rolls of fat jiggled as he walked. Gemstones glittered on every finger, and his man had oiled his forked yellow beard until it shone like real gold. “May the Lord of Light shower you with blessings on this most fortunate day, Princess Daenerys,” the magister said as he took her hand. He bowed his head, showing a thin glimpse of crooked yellow teeth through the gold of his beard. “She is a vision, Your Grace, a vision,” he told her brother. “Drogo will be enraptured.”
“她实在是太瘦了，”韦赛里斯说。他的头发和丹妮一样是淡银色，梳理到脑后，用一根龙骨发夹固定。他过分凝重的神色凸显出他僵硬枯槁的面容，他把手放在伊利里欧借给他的佩剑柄上。“你确定卓戈卡奥喜欢这么年轻的女人吗？”
“She’s too skinny,” Viserys said. His hair, the same silver-blond as hers, had been pulled back tightly behind his head and fastened with a dragonbone brooch. It was a severe look that emphasized the hard, gaunt lines of his face. He rested his hand on the hilt of the sword that Illyrio had lent him, and said, “Are you sure that Khal Drogo likes his women this young?”
“她既有过月事，对马王来说便已足龄。”这不是伊利里欧第一次重复了。“你瞧瞧她那头银金色的秀发，那双紫薇般的眼睛……她拥有古老瓦雷利亚的血统，毫无疑问，毫无疑问……况且她出身显赫，既是老王的女儿，又是新王的妹妹，说什么也不会吸引不了卓戈的。”当他放开她的手时，丹妮发现自己竟浑身颤抖。
“She has had her blood. She is old enough for the khal,” Illyrio told him, not for the first time. “Look at her. That silver-gold hair, those purple eyes … she is the blood of old Valyria, no doubt, no doubt … and highborn, daughter of the old king, sister to the new, she cannot fail to entrance our Drogo.” When he released her hand, Daenerys found herself trembling.
“是这样吗？”哥哥满腹狐疑地说，“这些野蛮人口味特别怪，连小男孩、马和羊都能搞……”
“I suppose,” her brother said doubtfully. “The savages have queer tastes. Boys, horses, sheep …”
“最好别在卓戈卡奥面前提起这些。”
“Best not suggest this to Khal Drogo,” Illyrio said.
哥哥淡紫色的眼瞳里闪现怒火。“你当我是笨蛋？”
Anger flashed in her brother’s lilac eyes. “Do you take me for a fool?”
总督微微低头。“我当您是个王者。所谓王者无凡虑，倘若我冒犯了您，那么我向您道歉。”语毕他转身击掌，示意轿夫动身。
The magister bowed slightly. “I take you for a king. Kings lack the caution of common men. My apologies if I have given offense.” He turned away and clapped his hands for his bearers.
待他们坐上伊利里欧雕琢华丽的轿子，潘托斯的街市已经漆黑一片。两名仆人走在前方照明，手里提着装饰精美，有着淡蓝玻璃罩子的油灯；另外十来个壮丁则协力扛着轿子。轿子帘幕之内封闭而温暖，透过伊利里欧身上那层厚重的香水，丹妮闻得到他苍白皮肤的臭味。
The streets of Pentos were pitch-dark when they set out in Illyrio’s elaborately carved palanquin. Two servants went ahead to light their way, carrying ornate oil lanterns with panes of pale blue glass, while a dozen strong men hoisted the poles to their shoulders. It was warm and close inside behind the curtains. Dany could smell the stench of Illyrio’s pallid flesh through his heavy perfumes.
那斜卧在她身旁枕边的哥哥对此倒是浑然不觉，他的心思早飞到狭海对岸去了。“我们用不着他整个卡拉萨，”韦赛里斯说，手指头把弄着那把借来的宝剑剑柄。其实丹妮知道哥哥从未认真学过剑术。“只要一万人，我想就够了。有这一万名多斯拉克哮吼武士，我便可以横扫七国全境。届时诸侯望族必会纷纷起而效力，追随他们真正的国王。提利尔、雷德温、戴瑞、葛雷乔伊等家族和我一样痛恨‘篡夺者’，南境多恩领的人早就满腔怒火，要为伊莉亚公主和她的孩子们复仇。更别提平民百姓了，他们会发出正义的怒吼，为国王而奋战。”他有点紧张地看看伊利里欧，“他们一直都这么想，对吧？”
Her brother, sprawled out on his pillows beside her, never noticed. His mind was away across the narrow sea. “We won’t need his whole khalasar,” Viserys said. His fingers toyed with the hilt of his borrowed blade, though Dany knew he had never used a sword in earnest. “Ten thousand, that would be enough, I could sweep the Seven Kingdoms with ten thousand Dothraki screamers. The realm will rise for its rightful king. Tyrell, Redwyne, Darry, Greyjoy, they have no more love for the Usurper than I do. The Dornishmen burn to avenge Elia and her children. And the smallfolk will be with us. They cry out for their king.” He looked at Illyrio anxiously. “They do, don’t they?”
“他们是您的子民，对您爱戴有加，”伊利里欧总督和颜悦色地回答，“全国上下的农庄村舍里，男人偷偷举杯向你致敬，女人则暗中缝制真龙旗帜，等待你率军渡海之日。”他耸耸宽阔的肩膀，“我的手下都这么说。”
“They are your people, and they love you well,” Magister Illyrio said amiably. “In holdfasts all across the realm, men lift secret toasts to your health while women sew dragon banners and hide them against the day of your return from across the water.” He gave a massive shrug. “Or so my agents tell me.”
丹妮没有手下，也无从得知狭海对岸的人们究竟在想些什么，做些什么，但她不相信伊利里欧这个人，也不相信他的甜言蜜语。然而哥哥却很热切地颔首同意。“我要亲自手刃篡夺者，”他立下宏愿，也没想想自己从没杀过人。“像他当年杀我哥哥一样。我也饶不了那个兰尼斯特家的‘弑君者’，我要为父王报仇。”
Dany had no agents, no way of knowing what anyone was doing or thinking across the narrow sea, but she mistrusted Illyrio’s sweet words as she mistrusted everything about Illyrio. Her brother was nodding eagerly, however. “I shall kill the Usurper myself,” he promised, who had never killed anyone, “as he killed my brother Rhaegar. And Lannister too, the Kingslayer, for what he did to my father.”
“这是再恰当不过的了。”伊利里欧总督道。丹妮瞥见他嘴际扬起细微的笑意，但哥哥却没注意，只是满意地点点头，然后掀开帘幕，望向无边黑夜。丹妮知道他脑海里又在演练当年三河血战的场景了。
“That would be most fitting,” Magister Illyrio said. Dany saw the smallest hint of a smile playing around his full lips, but her brother did not notice. Nodding, he pushed back a curtain and stared off into the night, and Dany knew he was fighting the Battle of the Trident once again.
卓戈卡奥的寝宫坐落在海湾边，拔起九座高塔，高耸砖墙上爬满苍白的长春藤。伊利里欧告诉他们，这座宫殿是潘托斯的总督们联合致赠卡奥的礼物，自由贸易城邦向来对这些游牧族长礼敬有加。“其实我们也不是真怕这些野蛮人，”他笑吟吟地给他们解释，“红袍僧们保证，有光之王庇佑，纵使百万多斯拉克人来袭，我们也无须惧怕……但他们的友谊既然如此廉价，咱们何乐而不为呢？”
The nine-towered manse of Khal Drogo sat beside the waters of the bay, its high brick walls overgrown with pale ivy. It had been given to the khal by the magisters of Pentos, Illyrio told them. The Free Cities were always generous with the horselords. “It is not that we fear these barbarians,” Illyrio would explain with a smile. “The Lord of Light would hold our city walls against a million Dothraki, or so the red priests promise … yet why take chances, when their friendship comes so cheap?”
轿子在门口停下来，一名守卫粗鲁地掀开帘幕。他有多斯拉克人典型的古铜色皮肤和黑色杏眼，但脸上却没有胡须，戴着“无垢者”④的青铜盔，上面有根刺。他冷冷扫视轿内乘客，伊利里欧总督用刺耳的多斯拉克语朝他吼了几句，对方也用相同的声调回应，然后便挥挥手示意他们进去。
Their palanquin was stopped at the gate, the curtains pulled roughly back by one of the house guards. He had the copper skin and dark almond eyes of a Dothraki, but his face was hairless and he wore the spiked bronze cap of the Unsullied. He looked them over coldly. Magister Illyrio growled something to him in the rough Dothraki tongue; the guardsman replied in the same voice and waved them through the gates.
丹妮注意到她哥哥的手紧紧握住那把借来的佩剑剑柄，看起来仿佛和她一样害怕。“不知好歹的臭太监。”韦赛里斯喃喃道，轿子颠簸着抬进宅院。
Dany noticed that her brother’s hand was clenched tightly around the hilt of his borrowed sword. He looked almost as frightened as she felt. “Insolent eunuch,” Viserys muttered as the palanquin lurched up toward the manse.
伊利里欧总督的话语甜如蜜糖：“许多达官显赫都会出席今晚盛宴，这些人平日里树敌甚多，作东的卡奥自然要保护客人，尤其是陛下您。不难想见，‘篡夺者’可是会出高价悬赏您的项上人头啊。”
Magister Illyrio’s words were honey. “Many important men will be at the feast tonight. Such men have enemies. The khal must protect his guests, yourself chief among them, Your Grace. No doubt the Usurper would pay well for your head.”
“可不是么？”韦赛里斯阴沉地说，“伊利里欧，他可是试了又试，这点我可以向你保证。他雇来的刺客紧盯我们不放，我是最后的真龙传人，只要我活着，他自然寝食难安。”
“Oh, yes,” Viserys said darkly. “He has tried, Illyrio, I promise you that. His hired knives follow us everywhere. I am the last dragon, and he will not sleep easy while I live.”
轿子速度渐缓，终于停了下来。帘幕再度掀开，一名奴隶伸手搀扶丹妮莉丝出轿。此时她注意到他的项圈不过是青铜打造罢了。她的兄长亦步亦趋地跟上，一只手仍旧紧握着剑柄不放。伊利里欧则靠着两名壮丁的帮忙好不容易才下了轿子。
The palanquin slowed and stopped. The curtains were thrown back, and a slave offered a hand to help Daenerys out. His collar, she noted, was ordinary bronze. Her brother followed, one hand still clenched hard around his sword hilt. It took two strong men to get Magister Illyrio back on his feet.
厅院之内，空气中弥漫着火椒、肉桂和甜檬等香料的馨香气息。他们被护送进会客厅，彩色镶嵌玻璃描绘出瓦雷利亚的殒落场景。四面墙壁上黑色灯笼里的灯油燃烧不绝，刻绘着两片石叶的拱廊下，一名太监正高声宣告他们的到访：“坦格利安家族的韦赛里斯三世，”他用高亢甜腻的声音喊，“安达尔人、洛伊拿人及‘先民’的国王，七国统治者暨全境守护者。他的妹妹，龙石岛公主‘风暴降生’丹妮莉丝。他的赞助人，潘托斯自由贸易城邦总督，伊利里欧·摩帕提斯。”
Inside the manse, the air was heavy with the scent of spices, pinchfire and sweet lemon and cinnamon. They were escorted across the entry hall, where a mosaic of colored glass depicted the Doom of Valyria. Oil burned in black iron lanterns all along the walls. Beneath an arch of twining stone leaves, a eunuch sang their coming. “Viserys of the House Targaryen, the Third of his Name,” he called in a high, sweet voice, “King of the Andals and the Rhoynar and the First Men, Lord of the Seven Kingdoms and Protector of the Realm. His sister, Daenerys Stormborn, Princess of Dragonstone. His honorable host, Illyrio Mopatis, Magister of the Free City of Pentos.”
他们越过太监，走进石柱林立，苍白长春藤四处攀蔓的庭院，叶影被月光染成白骨般的银色。院落里宾客往来穿梭，其中不少是多斯拉克卡奥，个个身躯高大，皮肤红褐，低垂长髯用金属银圈环环相扣，黑色长发乌黑油亮，绑成无数发辫，银铃悬系其间。然而人群中同样也有来自潘托斯、密尔和泰洛西的杀手和佣兵，有个比伊利里欧更胖的红袍僧，还有来自伊班港，浑身是毛的怪人，以及几位皮肤黑如暗檀的盛夏群岛领主。丹妮莉丝满怀惊奇地看着这些人……突然惊觉自己是在场惟一女性。
They stepped past the eunuch into a pillared courtyard overgrown in pale ivy. Moonlight painted the leaves in shades of bone and silver as the guests drifted among them. Many were Dothraki horselords, big men with red-brown skin, their drooping mustachios bound in metal rings, their black hair oiled and braided and hung with bells. Yet among them moved bravos and sellswords from Pentos and Myr and Tyrosh, a red priest even fatter than Illyrio, hairy men from the Port of Ibben, and lords from the Summer Isles with skin as black as ebony. Daenerys looked at them all in wonder … and realized, with a sudden start of fear, that she was the only woman there.
伊利里欧向他们耳语道：“站在那边的三位是卓戈的血盟卫，柱子边的是摩洛卡奥和他儿子罗戈洛。那个绿胡子的人是泰洛西大君的哥哥，他后面的则是乔拉·莫尔蒙爵士。”
Illyrio whispered to them. “Those three are Drogo’s bloodriders, there,” he said. “By the pillar is Khal Moro, with his son Rhogoro. The man with the green beard is brother to the Archon of Tyrosh, and the man behind him is Ser Jorah Mormont.”
最后一个名字引起了丹妮莉丝的注意，“他是个骑士？”
The last name caught Daenerys. “A knight?”
“如假包换，”伊利里欧透过胡子咯咯笑道，“被总主教大人亲手涂抹七圣油的骑士。”
“No less.” Illyrio smiled through his beard. “Anointed with the seven oils by the High Septon himself.”
“他在这里做什么？”她脱口而出。
“What is he doing here?” she blurted.
“就为了点芝麻绿豆小事，”伊利里欧告诉他们，“‘篡夺者’下令要他项上人头。他把几个逮着的盗猎者私自卖给泰洛西的奴隶贩子，而没有把他们交给守夜人。真是荒谬的法律，人人都应当有权处置自己的财产才对。”
“The Usurper wanted his head,” Illyrio told them. “Some trifling affront. He sold some poachers to a Tyroshi slaver instead of giving them to the Night’s Watch. Absurd law. A man should be able to do as he likes with his own chattel.”
“晚宴结束前，我要和乔拉爵士谈谈。”哥哥说。丹妮发现自己也好奇地端详着这位骑士，他年纪颇大，约莫四十来岁，头发虽已逐渐稀少，但身体仍旧健壮。他不穿丝棉质的衣服，改穿羊毛和皮革，一件暗绿色的外衣上绣着双脚人立的黑熊。
“I shall wish to speak with Ser Jorah before the night is done,” her brother said. Dany found herself looking at the knight curiously. He was an older man, past forty and balding, but still strong and fit. Instead of silks and cottons, he wore wool and leather. His tunic was a dark green, embroidered with the likeness of a black bear standing on two legs.
伊利里欧总督用他潮湿的手拍了拍丹妮裸露的肩膀，此刻她正目不转睛地看着那名来自她一无所知的草原的怪异男子。“好公主，您瞧好了，”他悄声道，“这就是卡奥他本人啦。”
She was still looking at this strange man from the homeland she had never known when Magister Illyrio placed a moist hand on her bare shoulder. “Over there, sweet princess,” he whispered, “there is the khal himself.”
丹妮心中只想赶紧逃避躲藏，但哥哥正盯着她呢，假如惹火了他，又得唤醒睡龙之怒。于是她紧张地转过头去，怯生生地打量起那个韦赛里斯希望在今晚宴会结束前开口要求娶她为妻的人。
Dany wanted to run and hide, but her brother was looking at her, and if she displeased him she knew she would wake the dragon. Anxiously, she turned and looked at the man Viserys hoped would ask to wed her before the night was done.
先前帮她沐浴的那名女孩所说的和事实倒也差距不大：卓戈卡奥比在场最高的人都还要高出一头，然而动作却极为敏捷轻灵，矫健的身形一如伊利里欧百兽园里的猎豹。他远比她想像中来得年轻，应该不超过三十岁。他的皮肤乃是亮铜色，厚重的胡须上系着黄金和青铜的铃铛。
The slave girl had not been far wrong, she thought. Khal Drogo was a head taller than the tallest man in the room, yet somehow light on his feet, as graceful as the panther in Illyrio’s menagerie. He was younger than she’d thought, no more than thirty. His skin was the color of polished copper, his thick mustachios bound with gold and bronze rings.
“我得过去表明来意。”伊利里欧总督说，“在这儿等着，我会带他过来。”
“I must go and make my submissions,” Magister Illyrio said. “Wait here. I shall bring him to you.”
当伊利里欧摇摇摆摆地走向卡奥时，哥哥紧紧抓住她的手，箍得她直想喊痛。“好妹妹，你看到他的辫子了没？”
Her brother took her by the arm as Illyrio waddled over to the khal , his fingers squeezing so hard that they hurt. “Do you see his braid, sweet sister?”
卓戈的发辫黑亮宛如午夜长空，涂抹了香油，看起来沉甸甸的，上面系有许多金属小铃，随他行动而当啷作响。他的长发过腰，超过臀部，尾端轻拂着大腿。
Drogo’s braid was black as midnight and heavy with scented oil, hung with tiny bells that rang softly as he moved. It swung well past his belt, below even his buttocks, the end of it brushing against the back of his thighs.
“你看到他的头发有多长了没？”韦赛里斯问，“每当多斯拉克人在战斗中落败，他们便割去辫子以示不誉，如此全世界都会知道他们的耻辱。卓戈卡奥一辈子都没有吃过败仗，他称得上是龙王伊耿再世，而你将会是他的王后。”
“You see how long it is?” Viserys said. “When Dothraki are defeated in combat, they cut off their braids in disgrace, so the world will know their shame. Khal Drogo has never lost a fight. He is Aegon the Dragonlord come again, and you will be his queen.”
丹妮看着卓戈卡奥，他的容貌刚毅冷峻，眼瞳黑亮冰如玛瑙。当她不小心唤醒睡龙之怒的时候，哥哥会欺负她，但他不像眼前这个男人这样能把她吓得六神无主。“我不想当他的王后，”她听见自己用细小的声音说，“韦赛里斯，求求你，求求你，我不要，我真的好想回家。”
Dany looked at Khal Drogo. His face was hard and cruel, his eyes as cold and dark as onyx. Her brother hurt her sometimes, when she woke the dragon, but he did not frighten her the way this man frightened her. “I don’t want to be his queen,” she heard herself say in a small, thin voice. “Please, please , Viserys, I don’t want to, I want to go home.”
“回家？”虽然他刻意把声音压低，但丹妮还是听得出话音里的愤怒。“好妹妹，你倒是说说看，我们回哪个家啊？我们的家早给人夺走了！”他把她拉进一旁的阴影里，避开众人的视线，指甲用力抠进她的肌肤。“我们回哪个家啊？”他重复着问，言下之意，家即是指君临、龙石岛和那整个失去的国度。
“Home!” He kept his voice low, but she could hear the fury in his tone. “How are we to go home, sweet sister? They took our home from us!” He drew her into the shadows, out of sight, his fingers digging into her skin. “How are we to go home?” he repeated, meaning King’s Landing, and Dragonstone, and all the realm they had lost.
可丹妮所指的根本就不是这些，她要的只是他们在伊利里欧宅邸里的居所，那儿虽然算不上真正的归宿，但毕竟是眼下他们所拥有的一切。可哥哥不愿听这些话，那里不是他的家，就连红漆门院也不是。他的指甲越掐越紧，似乎在逼问答案。最后她终于哑着嗓子，噙着泪水低语道：“我不知道……”
Dany had only meant their rooms in Illyrio’s estate, no true home surely, though all they had, but her brother did not want to hear that. There was no home there for him. Even the big house with the red door had not been home for him. His fingers dug hard into her arm, demanding an answer. “I don’t know …” she said at last, her voice breaking. Tears welled in her eyes.
“我却是知道的。”哥哥尖刻地说，“我们会带着一支军队回家，好妹妹，我们会带着卓戈的千军万马回家。假如你必须嫁给他，跟他上床才能换来这些，你就给我乖乖去做。”他朝她浅笑，“只要我能得到那支军队，就算得让他卡拉萨里的四万人通通把你操上一遍，我也会同意，必要的话，连他们的马一起上也行。现在你只给卓戈一个人干，已经该偷笑了。还不快把眼泪擦干，伊利里欧就要带他过来，我可不想让他看见你哭哭啼啼的样子。”
“I do,” he said sharply. “We go home with an army, sweet sister. With Khal Drogo’s army, that is how we go home. And if you must wed him and bed him for that, you will.” He smiled at her. “I’d let his whole khalasar fuck you if need be, sweet sister, all forty thousand men, and their horses too if that was what it took to get my army. Be grateful it is only Drogo. In time you may even learn to like him. Now dry your eyes. Illyrio is bringing him over, and he will not see you crying.”
丹妮转过头去，果然总督脸上堆满笑容，正一边打躬作揖一边陪送卓戈卡奥朝他们这边走来，她赶紧用手背抹去还未掉下的泪滴。
Dany turned and saw that it was true. Magister Illyrio, all smiles and bows, was escorting Khal Drogo over to where they stood. She brushed away unfallen tears with the back of her hand.
“快对他笑，”韦赛里斯的手又落到佩剑的剑柄上，紧张地说，“抬头挺胸，让他看看你那点胸部。诸神在上，你已经够平了。”
“Smile,” Viserys whispered nervously, his hand falling to the hilt of his sword. “And stand up straight. Let him see that you have breasts. Gods know, you have little enough as is.”
于是丹妮莉丝露出微笑，挺起胸膛。
Daenerys smiled, and stood up straight.
第五章 艾德
*EDDARD
来访的队伍如同一条由金、银和钢铁交融而成的璀璨河流，浩浩荡荡涌进城堡大门。他们为数一共三百，由引以为傲的封臣与骑士、誓言骑士①和自由骑手所组成。冰冷的北风拍打着他们头顶高举的十数面金色旗帜，上面绣了象征拜拉席恩家族的宝冠雄鹿。
T he visitors poured through the castle gates in a river of gold and silver and polished steel, three hundred strong, a pride of bannermen and knights, of sworn swords and freeriders. Over their heads a dozen golden banners whipped back and forth in the northern wind, emblazoned with the crowned stag of Baratheon.
队伍中有不少奈德熟悉的面孔。一头亮眼金发的是詹姆·兰尼斯特爵士，脸带烧伤的是桑铎·克里冈。他身旁的高大男孩一定是王储，而他们身后的那个畸形矮子则毫无疑问是“小恶魔”提利昂·兰尼斯特了。
Ned knew many of the riders. There came Ser Jaime Lannister with hair as bright as beaten gold, and there Sandor Clegane with his terrible burned face. The tall boy beside him could only be the crown prince, and that stunted little man behind them was surely the Imp, Tyrion Lannister.
然而那个走在队伍前列，由两名雪白披风御林铁卫随侍左右的人，在奈德眼里竟像个陌生人……一直到对方翻身跳下战马，发出熟悉的洪钟呐喊，然后一把抱住他，差点把他全身骨头拆散，他方才认出来者是谁。“奈德！啊，见到你真好，尤其是看到你那张冻得发紫的脸。”国王仔仔细细地上下打量他一番，然后朗声笑道，“你真是一点都没变。”
Yet the huge man at the head of the column, flanked by two knights in the snow-white cloaks of the Kingsguard, seemed almost a stranger to Ned … until he vaulted off the back of his warhorse with a familiar roar, and crushed him in a bone-crunching hug. “Ned! Ah, but it is good to see that frozen face of yours.” The king looked him over top to bottom, and laughed. “You have not changed at all.”
要是奈德也能对他说同样的话就好了。十五年前，当他们并肩为王位而奋战时，这位风息堡公爵是个面容修整干净，眼神清澈，让怀春少女梦寐以求的精壮男子。他身高六尺五寸，如巍然巨塔，在众人之中似鹤立鸡群。当他身披战甲，头戴双叉鹿角巨盔，则成了个名副其实的巨人。他的力气也不输巨人，惯用的那柄铁刺战锤连奈德都只能勉强举起。在那些岁月里，皮革和血的气味就如贵妇身上的香水，和他如影随形。
Would that Ned had been able to say the same. Fifteen years past, when they had ridden forth to win a throne, the Lord of Storm’s End had been clean-shaven, clear-eyed, and muscled like a maiden’s fantasy. Six and a half feet tall, he towered over lesser men, and when he donned his armor and the great antlered helmet of his House, he became a veritable giant. He’d had a giant’s strength too, his weapon of choice a spiked iron warhammer that Ned could scarcely lift. In those days, the smell of leather and blood had clung to him like perfume.
如今香水却当真和他如影随形了。他的腰围也变得和身高同样惊人。奈德上次见到国王，始自九年前的巴隆·葛雷乔伊之乱。那时雄鹿与冰原狼的旗帜齐飞，七国军队合力征讨那自立为铁群岛之王的领主。胜利之夜，两人并肩站在葛雷乔伊家族陷落的堡垒大厅里，劳勃接受叛军首领的降书，奈德则将其幼子席恩收为养子，之后劳勃起码胖了八石。如今虽有一团粗黑如铁丝的胡子遮住他肥胖的双下巴，却没有东西可以掩盖他突出的小腹和凹陷的黑眼圈。
Now it was perfume that clung to him like perfume, and he had a girth to match his height. Ned had last seen the king nine years before during Balon Greyjoy’s rebellion, when the stag and the direwolf had joined to end the pretensions of the self-proclaimed King of the Iron Islands. Since the night they had stood side by side in Greyjoy’s fallen stronghold, where Robert had accepted the rebel lord’s surrender and Ned had taken his son Theon as hostage and ward, the king had gained at least eight stone. A beard as coarse and black as iron wire covered his jaw to hide his double chin and the sag of the royal jowls, but nothing could hide his stomach or the dark circles under his eyes.
但劳勃终究是奈德的国君，而不仅仅是朋友，所以他只说：“陛下，临冬城听候您差遣。”
Yet Robert was Ned’s king now, and not just a friend, so he said only, “Your Grace. Winterfell is yours.”
此时其他人纷纷下马，城里的马夫过来照料马匹。劳勃的王后，瑟曦·兰尼斯特带着她年幼的孩子们走进城里。他们乘坐的轮宫乃是一辆巨大的双层马车，以油亮的橡木和镶滚金边的金属搭建而成，由四十匹骏马共同拖拉，因为太宽，只得停在城门外。奈德在雪地里跪下，亲吻王后手上的戒指，劳勃则像是拥抱自己失散已久的妹妹般地拥抱了凯特琳。接着孩子们被带上前来，彼此正式介绍过后，得到双方家长的赞许。
By then the others were dismounting as well, and grooms were coming forward for their mounts. Robert’s queen, Cersei Lannister, entered on foot with her younger children. The wheelhouse in which they had ridden, a huge double-decked carriage of oiled oak and gilded metal pulled by forty heavy draft horses, was too wide to pass through the castle gate. Ned knelt in the snow to kiss the queen’s ring, while Robert embraced Catelyn like a long-lost sister. Then the children had been brought forward, introduced, and approved of by both sides.
正式的见面礼仪刚结束，国王便说：“艾德，带我到你们家墓窖去，我要聊表敬意。”
No sooner had those formalities of greeting been completed than the king had said to his host, “Take me down to your crypt, Eddard. I would pay my respects.”
奈德就爱他这点，都过了这么多年，他依旧对她念念不忘。他叫人拿来提灯。一切都尽在不言之中。王后开口反对，她说大家打清早起就在赶路，这时人人又冷又倦，应该先稍事休息，要看死人也用不着这么急。她话说到这里，只见劳勃冷冷地盯着她，她的孪生弟弟詹姆静静地握住她的手，她也就没再说下去。
Ned loved him for that, for remembering her still after all these years. He called for a lantern. No other words were needed. The queen had begun to protest. They had been riding since dawn, everyone was tired and cold, surely they should refresh themselves first. The dead would wait. She had said no more than that; Robert had looked at her, and her twin brother Jaime had taken her quietly by the arm, and she had said no more.
于是奈德和他几乎快不认得的国王一同往地下墓窖走去。通往墓窖的螺旋楼梯非常狭窄，所以奈德打着灯走在前面。“我原本都快以为我们永远也到不了临冬城了，”劳勃边下楼边抱怨，“南方住久了，成天听人说我的七大王国如何如何，很容易就忘记你的领地和其他六国加起来一样大。”
They went down to the crypt together, Ned and this king he scarcely recognized. The winding stone steps were narrow. Ned went first with the lantern. “I was starting to think we would never reach Winterfell,” Robert complained as they descended. “In the south, the way they talk about my Seven Kingdoms, a man forgets that your part is as big as the other six combined.”
“陛下，相信您这趟旅途一定很愉快吧？”
“I trust you enjoyed the journey, Your Grace?”
劳勃哼了一声，“一路上到处都是沼泽、树林和田野，过了颈泽后连间像样的旅店都找不着。我这辈子还没见过这么广袤无边的冷野荒芜，你的子民都躲哪儿去了？”
Robert snorted. “Bogs and forests and fields, and scarcely a decent inn north of the Neck. I’ve never seen such a vast emptiness. Where are all your people?”
“多半是害羞不敢出来吧。”奈德打趣道，他感觉得到一股寒意自地窖席卷而上，有如幽深地底的冰冷气息。“在北方，国王可不是天天都见得着的。”
“Likely they were too shy to come out,” Ned jested. He could feel the chill coming up the stairs, a cold breath from deep within the earth. “Kings are a rare sight in the north.”
劳勃又哼了一声，“我看是躲在厚厚的积雪底下去了吧！奈德，都什么时候了你们这儿还冰天雪地！”国王边下楼边伸手扶着墙壁，稳住身子。
Robert snorted. “More likely they were hiding under the snow. Snow , Ned!” The king put one hand on the wall to steady himself as they descended.
“晚夏降雪在北方是稀松平常的事情，”奈德说，“希望没给您带来什么困扰，夏末的雪通常都不大。”
“Late summer snows are common enough,” Ned said. “I hope they did not trouble you. They are usually mild.”
“这叫做不大？异鬼才相信！”劳勃骂道，“那等到冬天你们这要冷成什么样子？我光想想就浑身发抖。”
“The Others take your mild snows,” Robert swore. “What will this place be like in winter? I shudder to think.”
“北方的冬天很冷很苦，”奈德承认，“但史塔克家族会熬过去的，这么多年来我们不是一直都熬过来了吗？”
“The winters are hard,” Ned admitted. “But the Starks will endure. We always have.”
“你真该来南方看看，”劳勃对他说：“趁夏天还没结束好好见识一下。高庭的原野放眼望去尽是金黄玫瑰。水果甜熟到会在你口中爆开，有甜瓜、蜜桃还有火梅，我保证你绝对没尝过这么甜美的东西。你待会儿就知道了，我这次给你捎了点过来。就算在风息堡，当热风吹起，天气热得你几乎无法动弹。奈德，你真该看看南方市镇的模样！遍地繁花，市集里的食物车载斗量；夏季的葡萄酒不但好喝，而且便宜得不像话，光闻闻市场里的酒味都会醉。人人都丰衣足食，喝得醉醺醺，吃得肥嘟嘟。”他咧嘴笑道，又用手拍了拍自己的啤酒肚。“奈德，还有南方的女孩子啊！”他的眼里焕发着光芒，高声叫道，“我敢跟你保证，只要天一热，女人的矜持就全不见了。她们会直接光着身子，在城堡附近的河里裸泳。就算上了街，也是热得穿不住毛衣皮衣，所以有钱的就穿丝织短袖，穷一点就穿棉质的。不过只要一流汗，衣服贴着皮肤，根本就和脱光光没两样。”国王开心地笑着。
“You need to come south,” Robert told him. “You need a taste of summer before it flees. In Highgarden there are fields of golden roses that stretch away as far as the eye can see. The fruits are so ripe they explode in your mouth—melons, peaches, fireplums, you’ve never tasted such sweetness. You’ll see, I brought you some. Even at Storm’s End, with that good wind off the bay, the days are so hot you can barely move. And you ought to see the towns, Ned! Flowers everywhere, the markets bursting with food, the summerwines so cheap and so good that you can get drunk just breathing the air. Everyone is fat and drunk and rich.” He laughed and slapped his own ample stomach a thump. “And the girls , Ned!” he exclaimed, his eyes sparkling. “I swear, women lose all modesty in the heat. They swim naked in the river, right beneath the castle. Even in the streets, it’s too damn hot for wool or fur, so they go around in these short gowns, silk if they have the silver and cotton if not, but it’s all the same when they start sweating and the cloth sticks to their skin, they might as well be naked.” The king laughed happily.
劳勃·拜拉席恩向来是个物欲旺盛，很懂享受的人。这一点他没有变，但是奈德没法不注意国王为声色娱乐所付出的代价。当他们抵达楼梯底端，进入墓窖的深沉黑暗时，劳勃已经气喘吁吁，呼吸困难，在灯光照映下面红耳赤了。
Robert Baratheon had always been a man of huge appetites, a man who knew how to take his pleasures. That was not a charge anyone could lay at the door of Eddard Stark. Yet Ned could not help but notice that those pleasures were taking a toll on the king. Robert was breathing heavily by the time they reached the bottom of the stairs, his face red in the lantern light as they stepped out into the darkness of the crypt.
“陛下请进，”奈德恭谨地说，然后将灯笼绕了个半圆。黑影鬼祟潜动，摇曳的火光照上脚底的石板，左右显现出两两成对的花岗岩柱，一直延展到远处的黑暗。历代逝者端坐石柱间的石制宝座上，背向墙壁，身后靠着存放遗体的石棺。“她在最后面，就在父亲和布兰登旁边。”
“Your Grace,” Ned said respectfully. He swept the lantern in a wide semicircle. Shadows moved and lurched. Flickering light touched the stones underfoot and brushed against a long procession of granite pillars that marched ahead, two by two, into the dark. Between the pillars, the dead sat on their stone thrones against the walls, backs against the sepulchres that contained their mortal remains. “She is down at the end, with Father and Brandon.”
他领路在前，穿梭于石柱间的过道，劳勃被地底的阴寒冻得直打哆嗦，默然无语地跟随其后。墓窖里总是冷的，他们走在史塔克家族历代的死者之间，足音回响在偌大的陵墓里。历代临冬城领主注视着他们，紧闭石棺上的雕像刻有他们生前的容貌，巨大的咆哮冰原狼石雕则蜷缩脚下。他们并列而坐，用再也看不见的眼睛注视着永寂的黑暗。生者的走动仿佛惊动了他们，墙壁上轮换着窜动的黑影。
He led the way between the pillars and Robert followed wordlessly, shivering in the subterranean chill. It was always cold down here. Their footsteps rang off the stones and echoed in the vault overhead as they walked among the dead of House Stark. The Lords of Winterfell watched them pass. Their likenesses were carved into the stones that sealed the tombs. In long rows they sat, blind eyes staring out into eternal darkness, while great stone direwolves curled round their feet. The shifting shadows made the stone figures seem to stir as the living passed by.
根据传统，凡是曾为临冬城之主的石像膝上都要放置一把铁制长剑，以确保这些含恨的复仇怨灵被封印在陵墓里，不致到阳间肆虐。其中最古老的早已锈蚀殆尽，原本放置宝剑的地方如今只剩红褐铁锈。奈德不禁扪心自问，这是否意味着那些幽魂如今可以恣意兴扰城堡？早先的临冬城主坚毅刚强一如他们脚底下的土地，在龙王尚未渡海来犯的日子里，他们不向任何人低头，自封为北境之王。
By ancient custom an iron longsword had been laid across the lap of each who had been Lord of Winterfell, to keep the vengeful spirits in their crypts. The oldest had long ago rusted away to nothing, leaving only a few red stains where the metal had rested on stone. Ned wondered if that meant those ghosts were free to roam the castle now. He hoped not. The first Lords of Winterfell had been men hard as the land they ruled. In the centuries before the Dragonlords came over the sea, they had sworn allegiance to no man, styling themselves the Kings in the North.
奈德停下脚步，举起油灯，陵墓仍然持续向前延伸，没入黑暗，然而之后的都是空位，没有封上，有如等待死者的黑洞，等待着他和他的子女。奈德想到这里就不舒服：“在这儿。”他对国王说。
Ned stopped at last and lifted the oil lantern. The crypt continued on into darkness ahead of them, but beyond this point the tombs were empty and unsealed; black holes waiting for their dead, waiting for him and his children. Ned did not like to think on that. “Here,” he told his king.
劳勃静静地点头，跪了下来，低头行礼。
Robert nodded silently, knelt, and bowed his head.
眼前共有三个并肩排列的石棺，奈德的父亲瑞卡德·史塔克有张严峻的长脸，当年的雕刻师父把他的神韵掌握得很好，他庄严地坐定，石指紧紧握住膝上横躺的宝剑，然而当年倾国的剑都救不了他。在他两旁较小的石棺里，则是他的子女。
There were three tombs, side by side. Lord Rickard Stark, Ned’s father, had a long, stern face. The stonemason had known him well. He sat with quiet dignity, stone fingers holding tight to the sword across his lap, but in life all swords had failed him. In two smaller sepulchres on either side were his children.
布兰登死时不过二十，他就在和奔流城的凯特琳·徒利成婚前不久，被“疯王”伊里斯·坦格利安二世残忍地绞死。他父亲被迫全程目睹爱子惨死的经过。其实布兰登才是临冬城真正的继承人，他既是长子，又是天生的领袖。
Brandon had been twenty when he died, strangled by order of the Mad King Aerys Targaryen only a few short days before he was to wed Catelyn Tully of Riverrun. His father had been forced to watch him die. He was the true heir, the eldest, born to rule.
莱安娜香消玉殒那时年方十六，还是个童心未泯的女孩。奈德全心全意地疼爱着这个妹妹，劳勃对她的爱犹有过之。她原本是要当他新娘的。
Lyanna had only been sixteen, a child-woman of surpassing loveliness. Ned had loved her with all his heart. Robert had loved her even more. She was to have been his bride.
“她比这漂亮多了。”一阵沉默之后，国王开口。他的眼光仍眷恋在莱安娜脸上不忍离去，仿佛这样可以将她唤回人世。最后他终于站起身，步履却因肥胖而显得有些不稳。“妈的，奈德，真有必要把她葬在这种地方么？”他的声音因为忆起的悲痛而嘶哑起来，“她不该与阴暗为伍……”
“She was more beautiful than that,” the king said after a silence. His eyes lingered on Lyanna’s face, as if he could will her back to life. Finally he rose, made awkward by his weight. “Ah, damn it, Ned, did you have to bury her in a place like this?” His voice was hoarse with remembered grief. “She deserved more than darkness …”
“她是临冬城史塔克家族的人，”奈德平静地说，“她属于这里。”
“She was a Stark of Winterfell,” Ned said quietly. “This is her place.”
“她应该安葬在风景优美的山丘上，坟上种棵果树，头顶有阳光白云与她为伴，有风霜雨露为她沐浴。”
“She should be on a hill somewhere, under a fruit tree, with the sun and clouds above her and the rain to wash her clean.”
“她临终前我就在她身边，”奈德提醒国王，“她只想回家，长眠在布兰登和父亲身边。”他至今还偶尔能听得见她死前的呓语。答应我，她在那个弥漫血腥和玫瑰馨香的房间里朝他喊，奈德，答应我。迟迟不退的高烧吸走了她全部的力量，当时的她气若游丝。但当他保证将信守诺言时，妹妹眼里的恐惧顿时一扫而空。奈德记得她最后的微笑，还有她如何紧抓他的手，随后离开人世，玫瑰花瓣自她掌心倾流而出，沉暗而无生气。在那之后发生了什么，他全都不记得。当人们找到他时，他仍然紧紧抱着她了无生气的躯体，哀恸得难以言语。据说最后是那个矮小的泽地人霍兰·黎德将她的手自他手中抽开，奈德自己一片茫然。“我一有机会就会带花来看她，”他说，“莱安娜她……一直很喜欢花。”
“I was with her when she died,” Ned reminded the king. “She wanted to come home, to rest beside Brandon and Father.” He could hear her still at times. Promise me , she had cried, in a room that smelled of blood and roses. Promise me, Ned . The fever had taken her strength and her voice had been faint as a whisper, but when he gave her his word, the fear had gone out of his sister’s eyes. Ned remembered the way she had smiled then, how tightly her fingers had clutched his as she gave up her hold on life, the rose petals spilling from her palm, dead and black. After that he remembered nothing. They had found him still holding her body, silent with grief. The little crannogman, Howland Reed, had taken her hand from his. Ned could recall none of it. “I bring her flowers when I can,” he said. “Lyanna was … fond of flowers.”
国王摸了摸她的脸颊，手指温柔地滑过粗砺的岩石表面，好似在爱抚活生生的恋人。“我发誓杀雷加为她报仇。”
The king touched her cheek, his fingers brushing across the rough stone as gently as if it were living flesh. “I vowed to kill Rhaegar for what he did to her.”
“你已经杀了他。”奈德提醒他。
“You did,” Ned reminded him.
“只杀了一次。”劳勃满腹酸楚地说。
“Only once,” Robert said bitterly.
两个死敌当年在三河交汇处的沙洲浅滩上碰面，炽烈的战火在四周蔓延。劳勃手持他的铁刺战锤，头戴鹿角巨盔；坦格利安王子则全身黑甲，胸铠上用红宝石镶成象征家族纹章的三头巨龙，在烈日照耀下有若熊熊烈火。两人鏖战不休，三叉戟河的河水在战马铁蹄下染成血红，直到最后劳勃的战锤击碎了对手铠甲上的三头龙，穿过铠甲下的躯体。奈德赶到现场时，雷加已经倒卧河中，气绝身亡；双方士兵在水里争抢从他铠甲上掉落的红宝石，激起翻飞水花。
They had come together at the ford of the Trident while the battle crashed around them, Robert with his warhammer and his great antlered helm, the Targaryen prince armored all in black. On his breastplate was the three-headed dragon of his House, wrought all in rubies that flashed like fire in the sunlight. The waters of the Trident ran red around the hooves of their destriers as they circled and clashed, again and again, until at last a crushing blow from Robert’s hammer stove in the dragon and the chest beneath it. When Ned had finally come on the scene, Rhaegar lay dead in the stream, while men of both armies scrabbled in the swirling waters for rubies knocked free of his armor.
“每晚在梦中，我都要杀他一次。”劳勃道，“就算再杀他个一千遍，他还是死有余辜。”
“In my dreams, I kill him every night,” Robert admitted. “A thousand deaths will still be less than he deserves.”
奈德不知道该说什么才好。又一阵沉默后，他说：“陛下，我们该回去了，王后正等着呢。”
There was nothing Ned could say to that. After a quiet, he said, “We should return, Your Grace. Your wife will be waiting.”
“王后王后，就算异鬼抓走她又如何？”劳勃尖酸地喃喃道，但他还是脚步蹒跚，沉重地朝来时的方向走去。“还有，你要敢再叫我一声陛下，我一定把你枭首示众。咱们之间可不只是君臣关系而已。”
“The Others take my wife,” Robert muttered sourly, but he started back the way they had come, his footsteps falling heavily. “And if I hear ‘Your Grace’ once more, I’ll have your head on a spike. We are more to each other than that.”
“我不敢忘。”奈德静静地回答。眼看国王没有答话，他便问，“跟我说说琼恩的事。”
“I had not forgotten,” Ned replied quietly. When the king did not answer, he said, “Tell me about Jon.”
劳勃摇摇头：“我这辈子没看过一个人病情恶化得那么迅速。为了庆祝我儿子的命名日，我们举办了一场比武竞技，当天见了他，你一定会认为他健康得能长命百岁。但两个星期之后他就死了，得的病像把烈火，活活把他给燃尽。”劳勃在一根石柱边停下来，正好站在一个死去已久的史塔克族人面前。“我好敬爱那个老人啊。”
Robert shook his head. “I have never seen a man sicken so quickly. We gave a tourney on my son’s name day. If you had seen Jon then, you would have sworn he would live forever. A fortnight later he was dead. The sickness was like a fire in his gut. It burned right through him.” He paused beside a pillar, before the tomb of a long-dead Stark. “I loved that old man.”
“我们都一样。”奈德停了一会儿，“凯特琳很为她妹妹担心，莱莎还好吗？”
“We both did.” Ned paused a moment. “Catelyn fears for her sister. How does Lysa bear her grief?”
劳勃的嘴角苦涩地扭了扭，“坦白说，一点也不好。”他顿了顿，“奈德，我认为琼恩的死把那个女人给逼疯了。她已经带着儿子逃回了鹰巢城。我是不希望她这么做的，我本来打算把他过继给凯岩城的泰温·兰尼斯特。琼恩既没有兄弟，又只有这么一个儿子，我怎么能让个女人家独自抚养他长大呢？”
Robert’s mouth gave a bitter twist. “Not well, in truth,” he admitted. “I think losing Jon has driven the woman mad, Ned. She has taken the boy back to the Eyrie. Against my wishes. I had hoped to foster him with Tywin Lannister at Casterly Rock. Jon had no brothers, no other sons. Was I supposed to leave him to be raised by women?”
奈德宁可把孩子交给毒蛇抚养，也不愿意交给泰温公爵，但他没说出口。有些旧伤永难愈合，只需简短几字，就会再汩汩流血。“她刚失去丈夫，”他小心翼翼地说，“或许做母亲的害怕再失去儿子吧，况且那孩子年纪还小。”
Ned would sooner entrust a child to a pit viper than to Lord Tywin, but he left his doubts unspoken. Some old wounds never truly heal, and bleed again at the slightest word. “The wife has lost the husband,” he said carefully. “Perhaps the mother feared to lose the son. The boy is very young.”
“六岁，成天病恹恹，这种人是新任鹰巢城公爵，诸神饶了我罢。”国王咒骂，“泰温公爵以前从没收过养子，莱莎应该觉得光荣才对。兰尼斯特家族历史悠久，势力又大，可她竟然连考虑都不肯考虑，也没得到我准许，就趁着月黑风高不声不响离开了。瑟曦差点没气炸。”他深深地叹了口气，“你知道吗？那孩子的名是照着我取的，叫劳勃·艾林。我发誓要保护他，怎么能让他母亲就这样把他偷偷带走呢？”
“Six, and sickly, and Lord of the Eyrie, gods have mercy,” the king swore. “Lord Tywin had never taken a ward before. Lysa ought to have been honored. The Lannisters are a great and noble House. She refused to even hear of it. Then she left in the dead of night, without so much as a by-your-leave. Cersei was furious.” He sighed deeply. “The boy is my namesake, did you know that? Robert Arryn. I am sworn to protect him. How can I do that if his mother steals him away?”
“不如让我来收养他，你意下如何？”奈德说，“莱莎应该会同意。她年轻时和凯特琳很亲，她来这儿也会比较有家的感觉。”
“I will take him as ward, if you wish,” Ned said. “Lysa should consent to that. She and Catelyn were close as girls, and she would be welcome here as well.”
“我的老友啊，你是个好人。”国王回答，“只可惜为时已晚。泰温公爵既然同意收养，如果又把那孩子转到别的地方，对他是种侮辱。”
“A generous offer, my friend,” the king said, “but too late. Lord Tywin has already given his consent. Fostering the boy elsewhere would be a grievous affront to him.”
“我关心的是我外甥的幸福，而不在乎兰尼斯特家族高兴不高兴。”奈德表示。
“I have more concern for my nephew’s welfare than I do for Lannister pride,” Ned declared.
“那是因为你晚上不用陪兰尼斯特家的女人睡觉，”劳勃放声大笑，笑声在墓窖里回荡，在拱形屋顶上反射，那笑容是浓密黑虬髯里的一条白线。“呵，奈德，”他说，“你还是老样子，太严肃了。”他伸出巨大的手臂环住奈德的肩膀，“我本想过几天再跟你谈这件事，但你既然提起，就现在说罢。来，我们走。”
“That is because you do not sleep with a Lannister.” Robert laughed, the sound rattling among the tombs and bouncing from the vaulted ceiling. His smile was a flash of white teeth in the thicket of the huge black beard. “Ah, Ned,” he said, “you are still too serious.” He put a massive arm around Ned’s shoulders. “I had planned to wait a few days to speak to you, but I see now there’s no need for it. Come, walk with me.”
他们朝墓窖的出口走去，穿梭于石柱之间，两旁的史塔克死者空洞的眼神仿佛正跟随他们的脚步。国王依旧搂着奈德：“你一定想不透，隔了这么多年，为什么现在我才到临冬城来。”
They started back down between the pillars. Blind stone eyes seemed to follow them as they passed. The king kept his arm around Ned’s shoulder. “You must have wondered why I finally came north to Winterfell, after so long.”
奈德确有几个可能的猜测，但他没说出来。“我看，想来和我作伴？”他故作轻松地说，“不然就是绝境长城的缘故。陛下，您一定要去看看，在城墙上亲自走一遭，再和守军谈谈。守夜人部队如今已没有过去的盛况，班扬说……”
Ned had his suspicions, but he did not give them voice. “For the joy of my company, surely,” he said lightly. “And there is the Wall. You need to see it, Your Grace, to walk along its battlements and talk to those who man it. The Night’s Watch is a shadow of what it once was. Benjen says—”
“相信我很快就有机会当面和你弟弟聊聊，”劳勃道，“至于绝境长城，已经在那儿多久了？八千多年了罢，再撑个几天应该没问题。我有更要紧的事要跟你说，如今时局紧张，我需要信得过的得力助手，就像琼恩·艾林那样的人。他既是鹰巢城公爵，又是东境守护和御前首相，要找到合适的替代人选可不容易。”
“No doubt I will hear what your brother says soon enough,” Robert said. “The Wall has stood for what, eight thousand years? It can keep a few days more. I have more pressing concerns. These are difficult times. I need good men about me. Men like Jon Arryn. He served as Lord of the Eyrie, as Warden of the East, as the Hand of the King. He will not be easy to replace.”
“他儿子……”奈德开口。
“His son …” Ned began.
“他的儿子会继承鹰巢城公爵爵位，以及麾下领地所有税赋。”劳勃打断他，“就这样了。”
“His son will succeed to the Eyrie and all its incomes,” Robert said brusquely. “No more.”
奈德大吃一惊，错愕地停下脚步，转身面对国王，脱口便道：“艾林家族世代担任东境守护，这是个世袭的职位啊。”
That took Ned by surprise. He stopped, startled, and turned to look at his king. The words came unbidden. “The Arryns have always been Wardens of the East. The title goes with the domain.”
“等他长大成人，我再考虑要不要交还给他。”劳勃说，“然而我首先要打算的是今年和往后的几年。奈德，六岁的小男孩没法统率军队。”
“Perhaps when he comes of age, the honor can be restored to him,” Robert said. “I have this year to think of, and next. A six-year-old boy is no war leader, Ned.”
“这头衔在承平时期不过是个荣誉职，就让那孩子保留这个称号吧。就算不为了他，为了他那一生为国鞠躬尽瘁的父亲，这也是应该的。”
“In peace, the title is only an honor. Let the boy keep it. For his father’s sake if not his own. Surely you owe Jon that much for his service.”
国王听了不大高兴，把手从奈德肩膀上抽了回来：“琼恩鞠躬尽瘁是他职责所在，他本来就该对他的君王效忠。奈德，我不是忘恩负义的人，这点你应该最清楚。但那孩子可不是他父亲，一个稚龄幼儿绝对治理不了东方。”他的语气缓和下来，“不说这些了，我有更要紧的事跟你商量，而且这次我不准你跟我争辩。”劳勃紧握住奈德的手肘，“奈德，我有事需要你帮忙。”
The king was not pleased. He took his arm from around Ned’s shoulders. “Jon’s service was the duty he owed his liege lord. I am not ungrateful, Ned. You of all men ought to know that. But the son is not the father. A mere boy cannot hold the east.” Then his tone softened. “Enough of this. There is a more important office to discuss, and I would not argue with you.” Robert grasped Ned by the elbow. “I have need of you, Ned.”
“陛下，我永远任您差遣。”
“I am yours to command, Your Grace. Always.” They were words he had to say, and so he said them, apprehensive about what might come next.
他虽然很担心国王的下一步，却不得不这么说。
Robert scarcely seemed to hear him. “Those years we spent in the Eyrie … gods , those were good years. I want you at my side again, Ned. I want you down in King’s Landing, not up here at the end of the world where you are no damned use to anybody.” Robert looked off into the darkness, for a moment as melancholy as a Stark. “I swear to you, sitting a throne is a thousand times harder than winning one. Laws are a tedious business and counting coppers is worse. And the people … there is no end of them. I sit on that damnable iron chair and listen to them complain until my mind is numb and my ass is raw. They all want something, money or land or justice. The lies they tell … and my lords and ladies are no better. I am surrounded by flatterers and fools. It can drive a man to madness, Ned. Half of them don’t dare tell me the truth, and the other half can’t find it. There are nights I wish we had lost at the Trident. Ah, no, not truly, but …”
劳勃好像根本就没听他说话，只自顾自地续道：“想想我们一起在鹰巢城度过的那几年……妈的，好一段快乐时光！奈德，我希望你能再次陪在我身边，我希望你能南下到君临与我共商国事，不要一个人躲在世界的尽头，毫无用武之地。”劳勃望向远处的昏暗，突然像个史塔克族人般忧郁地说：“我向你发誓，坐在铁王座上管理国政，比夺取王位要难上千倍。法律仲裁是件累煞人的事，清算国库更麻烦。还有那些没完没了的平民百姓，我成天坐在那该死的铁椅子上听他们怨东怨西，听得我脑筋麻木，屁股酸痛。每个人一开口就是要钱，不然就是要土地或法律仲裁。全是些满口胡言的家伙，偏偏我的大臣贵妇们也好不到哪里去。我身边都是些白痴和马屁精，奈德，这真会把人逼疯的。他们要么稀里糊涂，要么故意说谎。有时候我睡觉，还真希望咱们当年在三叉戟河吃了败仗。啊，我不是说真吃了败仗，只是……”
“I understand,” Ned said softly.
“我了解。”奈德轻轻地说。
Robert looked at him. “I think you do. If so, you are the only one, my old friend.” He smiled. “Lord Eddard Stark, I would name you the Hand of the King.”
劳勃看着他：“老朋友，我想也只有你能够了解。”他面带微笑，“艾德·史塔克大人，我将任命你为国王之手，即御前首相。”
Ned dropped to one knee. The offer did not surprise him; what other reason could Robert have had for coming so far? The Hand of the King was the second-most powerful man in the Seven Kingdoms. He spoke with the king’s voice, commanded the king’s armies, drafted the king’s laws. At times he even sat upon the Iron Throne to dispense king’s justice, when the king was absent, or sick, or otherwise indisposed. Robert was offering him a responsibility as large as the realm itself.
奈德单膝跪下。他并不意外，除了这个原因，劳勃还会为了什么千里迢迢北上呢？御前首相是七大王国中一人之下，万人之上的显赫要职，他将代表国王发号施令、运用权威、统御三军、执掌司法。遇到国王缺席、生病或其他突发事件，他甚至会坐上铁王座，直接统治国家。劳勃等于是将王国交到他手中。
It was the last thing in the world he wanted.
而这，却是他最最不想要的。
“Your Grace,” he said. “I am not worthy of the honor.”
“陛下，”他说，“恐怕我的能力不足以胜任此等要职。”
Robert groaned with good-humored impatience. “If I wanted to honor you, I’d let you retire. I am planning to make you run the kingdom and fight the wars while I eat and drink and wench myself into an early grave.” He slapped his gut and grinned. “You know the saying, about the king and his Hand?”
劳勃高兴地发出一声佯装不耐的咕哝，“我要真为你着想，早让你退休啦。我是打算让你来治理国家，带兵打仗，而我自己呢？痛痛快快地吃喝玩乐，嫖个过瘾。”他拍拍肚皮，嘿嘿笑道：“你知道那句形容国王和首相的谚语吧？”
Ned knew the saying. “What the king dreams,” he said, “the Hand builds.”
奈德当然知道。“国王做梦，”他说，“首相筑梦。”
“I bedded a fishmaid once who told me the lowborn have a choicer way to put it. The king eats, they say, and the Hand takes the shit.” He threw back his head and roared his laughter. The echoes rang through the darkness, and all around them the dead of Winterfell seemed to watch with cold and disapproving eyes.
“有个跟我上床的渔家女孩告诉我，他们中下阶层的百姓有个更妙的比喻：国王吃席，首相拉屎。”
Finally the laughter dwindled and stopped. Ned was still on one knee, his eyes upraised. “Damn it, Ned,” the king complained. “You might at least humor me with a smile.”
此话一出，他仰头狂笑，回音响彻黑暗，四面八方的临冬城死者却似乎很不以为然地冷眼旁观。当笑声终止，奈德仍然单膝跪地，眼睛上扬。“妈的，奈德，”国王抱怨，“你好歹也跟我一起笑一笑？”
“They say it grows so cold up here in winter that a man’s laughter freezes in his throat and chokes him to death,” Ned said evenly. “Perhaps that is why the Starks have so little humor.”
“有人说这里的冬天太冷，人若是笑了，声音会冻结在喉咙里，直到把人活活噎死。”奈德平静地说，“或许这就是为什么我们史塔克家人甚少有幽默感。”
“Come south with me, and I’ll teach you how to laugh again,” the king promised. “You helped me win this damnable throne, now help me hold it. We were meant to rule together. If Lyanna had lived, we should have been brothers, bound by blood as well as affection. Well, it is not too late. I have a son. You have a daughter. My Joff and your Sansa shall join our houses, as Lyanna and I might once have done.”
“跟我一起到南方去，我一定让你再露笑颜。”国王向他保证，“你既然帮我得到了这张该死的铁椅子，就该帮我保住它吧。我们注定是要并肩治理国家的。倘若莱安娜还活着，我们现在就该是连姻手足，名副其实的兄弟了。呵呵，好在现在也不迟，我有个儿子，你有个女儿，我家小乔和你的珊莎会把两家结合在一起，就好像当年的莱安娜和我。”
This offer did surprise him. “Sansa is only eleven.”
这个提议却真吓了奈德一跳：“可珊莎才十一岁。”
Robert waved an impatient hand. “Old enough for betrothal. The marriage can wait a few years.” The king smiled. “Now stand up and say yes, curse you.”
劳勃不耐烦地挥挥手：“已经大到可以订婚啦，结婚等过几年再说。”国王微笑，“你这浑球，还不快站起来说好。”
“Nothing would give me greater pleasure, Your Grace,” Ned answered. He hesitated. “These honors are all so unexpected. May I have some time to consider? I need to tell my wife …”
“陛下，这是至高无上的荣耀与喜乐。”奈德回答，接着他露出迟疑，“可也太让我措手不及，能否给我点时间考虑？我要告诉我妻子……”
“Yes, yes, of course, tell Catelyn, sleep on it if you must.” The king reached down, clasped Ned by the hand, and pulled him roughly to his feet. “Just don’t keep me waiting too long. I am not the most patient of men.”
“好，好，当然没问题，去跟凯特琳说罢，好好想清楚。”国王伸出手，拍了拍奈德的手，然后把他拉起来。“别教我等太久就是，你也知道我没什么耐性。”
For a moment Eddard Stark was filled with a terrible sense of foreboding. This was his place, here in the north. He looked at the stone figures all around them, breathed deep in the chill silence of the crypt. He could feel the eyes of the dead. They were all listening, he knew. And winter was coming.
一时之间，艾德·史塔克心中充满了一种山雨欲来的恐惧，毕竟寒冷的北国才是真正属于他的故乡。他看看四周石像，吸了口墓窖的冰冷空气。他隐约可以感觉得出身旁历代先祖的目光，他知道他们正侧耳倾听，他知道凛冬将至。
*JON
第六章 琼恩
T here were times—not many, but a few—when Jon Snow was glad he was a bastard. As he filled his wine cup once more from a passing flagon, it struck him that this might be one of them.
在某些场合——虽然不多，却依旧存在——琼恩·雪诺会暗自庆幸自己是个私生子。当他拿起传来的酒壶，把自己刚喝干的杯子斟满时，他惊觉现在就是这样的场合。
He settled back in his place on the bench among the younger squires and drank. The sweet, fruity taste of summerwine filled his mouth and brought a smile to his lips.
他返身坐回长凳，和青年侍从们坐在一起，啜饮杯中佳酿。满口夏日红酒甜美的水果香气，牵起他嘴角的一丝微笑。
The Great Hall of Winterfell was hazy with smoke and heavy with the smell of roasted meat and fresh-baked bread. Its grey stone walls were draped with banners. White, gold, crimson: the direwolf of Stark, Baratheon’s crowned stag, the lion of Lannister. A singer was playing the high harp and reciting a ballad, but down at this end of the hall his voice could scarcely be heard above the roar of the fire, the clangor of pewter plates and cups, and the low mutter of a hundred drunken conversations.
临冬城的大厅里热气蒸腾，四溢着烤肉和刚出炉的面包所散发的香味。大厅的灰石墙上挂满了各家旗帜，白色是史塔克家族的冰原奔狼，金色是拜拉席恩家族的宝冠雄鹿，绯红则是兰尼斯特家族的怒吼雄狮。大厅里有位歌手正拨弄竖琴，高唱歌谣，然而在炉火熊熊，蜡碟碰撞和酩酊交谈的喧嚣覆盖下，坐在长厅末端的他根本听不清楚。
It was the fourth hour of the welcoming feast laid for the king. Jon’s brothers and sisters had been seated with the royal children, beneath the raised platform where Lord and Lady Stark hosted the king and queen. In honor of the occasion, his lord father would doubtless permit each child a glass of wine, but no more than that. Down here on the benches, there was no one to stop Jon drinking as much as he had a thirst for.
为国王接风洗尘而举办的欢迎晚宴，已经进行了整整四个钟头。琼恩的兄弟姐妹和他隔着整个大厅，他们和王子公主们坐在一起，只比史塔克公爵夫妇和国王王后所处的高台低一席。每逢这种特殊场合，他的公爵父亲总会特许每个孩子喝一杯葡萄酒，但不准再多。反倒是像他这样与随从仆役们在一块儿，没人会管他喝多少。
And he was finding that he had a man’s thirst, to the raucous delight of the youths around him, who urged him on every time he drained a glass. They were fine company, and Jon relished the stories they were telling, tales of battle and bedding and the hunt. He was certain that his companions were more entertaining than the king’s offspring. He had sated his curiosity about the visitors when they made their entrance. The procession had passed not a foot from the place he had been given on the bench, and Jon had gotten a good long look at them all.
他发现自己的酒量原来和成人差不多，在身旁这群兴高采烈的年轻人怂恿下，每当喝干一杯，他们就怂恿他再来一杯。琼恩很乐意与他们为伍，津津有味地听他们彼此吹嘘战争、打猎和偷情的故事。他相信这群伙伴绝对比王子公主们有趣。先前当访客们从大门口鱼贯而入时，他已经满足了自己的好奇心。队伍正好从他座位前方不远处经过，他便好好地瞧了个清楚。
His lord father had come first, escorting the queen. She was as beautiful as men said. A jeweled tiara gleamed amidst her long golden hair, its emeralds a perfect match for the green of her eyes. His father helped her up the steps to the dais and led her to her seat, but the queen never so much as looked at him. Even at fourteen, Jon could see through her smile.
他的公爵父亲护送王后走在前面，她正如传闻中那么美丽，镶满宝石的头冠衬着她金色的长发，闪闪发亮，其上镶嵌的翡翠和她璀璨明亮的碧眼搭配得完美无瑕。父亲搀扶她步上高台，引她到席位坐下，然而她自始至终都没正眼瞧他一下。琼恩虽然只有十四岁，但他还是看得出王后的笑容只是表面功夫。
Next had come King Robert himself, with Lady Stark on his arm. The king was a great disappointment to Jon. His father had talked of him often: the peerless Robert Baratheon, demon of the Trident, the fiercest warrior of the realm, a giant among princes. Jon saw only a fat man, red-faced under his beard, sweating through his silks. He walked like a man half in his cups.
接着是国王本人，他挽着史塔克夫人的手走了进来。琼恩见到国王，只觉大失所望。父亲常说起那个天下无双的勇士劳勃·拜拉席恩，三叉戟河的恶魔，全国最骁勇善战的武士，在王公贵族间卓然不群。可在琼恩眼里，他不过是个红脸长须，汗流浃背的胖子，走起路来一副耽溺杯中物的模样。
After them came the children. Little Rickon first, managing the long walk with all the dignity a three-year-old could muster. Jon had to urge him on when he stopped to visit. Close behind came Robb, in grey wool trimmed with white, the Stark colors. He had the Princess Myrcella on his arm. She was a wisp of a girl, not quite eight, her hair a cascade of golden curls under a jeweled net. Jon noticed the shy looks she gave Robb as they passed between the tables and the timid way she smiled at him. He decided she was insipid. Robb didn’t even have the sense to realize how stupid she was; he was grinning like a fool.
在他之后进来的是孩子们，小瑞肯走在第一，很努力地要装出三岁小孩所能表现出来的庄严姿态。他走到琼恩面前时还停下来打招呼，琼恩只得催促他快走。罗柏紧跟在后，他穿着象征史塔克家族色彩的灰绒白边羊毛衣，挽着弥赛菈公主的手。她还是个小女孩，年纪不满八岁，珠光宝气的发网内金色卷发有如瀑布般流泻直下。他们经过时，琼恩注意到她看着罗柏时的羞赧微笑。他的结论是这女孩八成挺无趣。不过罗柏根本就没发现她有多蠢，他自己也看着她，笑得像个傻子。
His half sisters escorted the royal princes. Arya was paired with plump young Tommen, whose white-blond hair was longer than hers. Sansa, two years older, drew the crown prince, Joffrey Baratheon. He was twelve, younger than Jon or Robb, but taller than either, to Jon’s vast dismay. Prince Joffrey had his sister’s hair and his mother’s deep green eyes. A thick tangle of blond curls dripped down past his golden choker and high velvet collar. Sansa looked radiant as she walked beside him, but Jon did not like Joffrey’s pouty lips or the bored, disdainful way he looked at Winterfell’s Great Hall.
接着他的两个异母妹妹也护送王子们进来了，艾莉亚和胖嘟嘟的托曼王子走在一块儿，他那白金色的长发比她的头发还要长。大她两岁的珊莎则陪着王太子乔佛里·拜拉席恩。乔佛里今年十二岁，年纪比琼恩和罗柏都小，长得却比两人都要高，琼恩想到这就不痛快。乔佛里王子有妹妹的长发和母亲的深邃碧眼，金色的发卷盖过金色宽领带和高贵的天鹅绒衣领，珊莎走在他身旁，容光焕发。不过琼恩可一点也不喜欢乔佛里那副嘴唇上噘，对临冬城大厅轻蔑鄙夷的神态。
He was more interested in the pair that came behind him: the queen’s brothers, the Lannisters of Casterly Rock. The Lion and the Imp; there was no mistaking which was which. Ser Jaime Lannister was twin to Queen Cersei; tall and golden, with flashing green eyes and a smile that cut like a knife. He wore crimson silk, high black boots, a black satin cloak. On the breast of his tunic, the lion of his House was embroidered in gold thread, roaring its defiance. They called him the Lion of Lannister to his face and whispered “Kingslayer” behind his back.
他对走在王太子后面的这一对比较感兴趣：他们是王后的兄弟，都是凯岩城兰尼斯特家的人。任何人都不会把谁是“雄狮”，谁又是“小恶魔”给弄混的。詹姆·兰尼斯特爵士是瑟曦王后的孪生手足，生得高大英挺，金发飘扬，有着闪亮的碧眼和利如刀锋的笑容。他穿着大红丝质长衫，漆黑高统靴和黑缎长披风。上衣的前胸用金线绣了只兰尼斯特家怒吼不驯的雄狮。人们称他“兰尼斯特雄狮”，又在背后窃窃私语“弑君者”这个名号。
Jon found it hard to look away from him. This is what a king should look like , he thought to himself as the man passed.
琼恩发觉自己几乎无法将视线自他身上抽离。这才是王者应有的风范，詹姆走过面前时，他如此暗想。
Then he saw the other one, waddling along half-hidden by his brother’s side. Tyrion Lannister, the youngest of Lord Tywin’s brood and by far the ugliest. All that the gods had given to Cersei and Jaime, they had denied Tyrion. He was a dwarf, half his brother’s height, struggling to keep pace on stunted legs. His head was too large for his body, with a brute’s squashed-in face beneath a swollen shelf of brow. One green eye and one black one peered out from under a lank fall of hair so blond it seemed white. Jon watched him with fascination.
接着他望向詹姆的兄弟，他正摇摇摆摆、半躲藏地走在哥哥身边。提利昂·兰尼斯特是泰温公爵年纪最小，也最丑陋的孩子。诸神赐予瑟曦和詹姆的一切优点，一样都没留给提利昂。他是个身高只有哥哥一半的侏儒，鼓动着畸形的双腿努力想跟上哥哥的脚步。他的头大得不合比例，鼓胀额头下是一张扭曲的怪脸。双眼一碧一黑，从满头长直金发下面向外窥视，他头发的颜色几乎金亮成白。琼恩饶富兴味地看着他打面前经过。
The last of the high lords to enter were his uncle, Benjen Stark of the Night’s Watch, and his father’s ward, young Theon Greyjoy. Benjen gave Jon a warm smile as he went by. Theon ignored him utterly, but there was nothing new in that. After all had been seated, toasts were made, thanks were given and returned, and then the feasting began.
达官贵胄中最后进来的是他叔叔，守夜人部队的班扬·史塔克，以及父亲年轻的养子席恩·葛雷乔伊。班扬经过时对他露出温和的微笑，席恩则对他完全视若无睹，不过这也不是一两天的事情了。等贵宾全部就座之后，大家彼此举杯祝福，互致贺词，然后晚宴便正式开始。
Jon had started drinking then, and he had not stopped.
琼恩从那时起就在喝酒，到现在还没停下。
Something rubbed against his leg beneath the table. Jon saw red eyes staring up at him. “Hungry again?” he asked. There was still half a honeyed chicken in the center of the table. Jon reached out to tear off a leg, then had a better idea. He knifed the bird whole and let the carcass slide to the floor between his legs. Ghost ripped into it in savage silence. His brothers and sisters had not been permitted to bring their wolves to the banquet, but there were more curs than Jon could count at this end of the hall, and no one had said a word about his pup. He told himself he was fortunate in that too.
长桌下有东西摩擦他的脚，低头只见一对红眼睛盯着他望。“肚子又饿了？”他问。餐桌中间还有半只蜜汁烤鸡，琼恩伸手撕下一只鸡腿，突然心生一计，用餐刀把整只鸡的肉切割下来，然后让剩余的鸡骨从自己双腿间滑到地上。“白灵”野蛮却安静地撕咬起骨头。他的兄妹们都不准带狼进宴会厅，惟有琼恩所处的大厅尾端，狗多得数不清，自然也没人管他的小狼。他告诉自己这也算专有的好福气。
His eyes stung. Jon rubbed at them savagely, cursing the smoke. He swallowed another gulp of wine and watched his direwolf devour the chicken.
眼睛突然一阵刺痛，琼恩粗鲁地揉揉，咒骂着熏烟。他又喝了一大口葡萄酒，然后看着白灵吞噬了整只鸡。
Dogs moved between the tables, trailing after the serving girls. One of them, a black mongrel bitch with long yellow eyes, caught a scent of the chicken. She stopped and edged under the bench to get a share. Jon watched the confrontation. The bitch growled low in her throat and moved closer. Ghost looked up, silent, and fixed the dog with those hot red eyes. The bitch snapped an angry challenge. She was three times the size of the direwolf pup. Ghost did not move. He stood over his prize and opened his mouth, baring his fangs. The bitch tensed, barked again, then thought better of this fight. She turned and slunk away, with one last defiant snap to save her pride. Ghost went back to his meal.
狗们在餐桌间来回走动，跟着女侍四处逡巡。其中有一只长着大大的黄眼睛的黑色混血母狗闻到了鸡肉香味，便停下脚步，低身挤过长椅想要分一杯羹。琼恩冷眼旁观双方对峙，只见那母狗喉头发出低吼，慢慢靠近。白灵则沉默地抬头，用那双血红的眼睛冷冷瞪视对方。母狗发出一声愤怒的挑衅，她的身躯是小冰原狼的三倍，但白灵却动也不动，只霸占住自己的食物，张开嘴巴，露出尖牙。母狗见状，又吠了一声，最后决定这场架还是不打为妙。于是它转身溜走，离去前还不忘傲慢地吠了一声以维持自尊。白灵继续低头猛嚼。
Jon grinned and reached under the table to ruffle the shaggy white fur. The direwolf looked up at him, nipped gently at his hand, then went back to eating.
琼恩得意地笑着，探手到桌底摸摸它一身蓬松的白绒毛。小狼抬起头望他，温柔地咬了他的手一口，然后又低头大快朵颐。
“Is this one of the direwolves I’ve heard so much of?” a familiar voice asked close at hand.
“这就是大名鼎鼎的冰原狼吗？”一个熟悉的声音在身旁问。
Jon looked up happily as his uncle Ben put a hand on his head and ruffled his hair much as Jon had ruffled the wolf’s. “Yes,” he said. “His name is Ghost.”
琼恩开心地抬头，班叔叔把手放在他头上，拨弄着他的头发，就好像他刚才拨弄白灵身上的毛一样。“对，”他回答，“它叫做白灵。”
One of the squires interrupted the bawdy story he’d been telling to make room at the table for their lord’s brother. Benjen Stark straddled the bench with long legs and took the wine cup out of Jon’s hand. “Summerwine,” he said after a taste. “Nothing so sweet. How many cups have you had, Jon?”
一名正说着低级故事的侍从停下来，挪出位置给公爵的弟弟坐。班扬·史塔克跨坐上长凳，从琼恩手里接过酒杯。“夏日红，”他尝了一口后缓缓地说，“没有东西比得上这酒甜美。琼恩，你今晚喝了几杯？”
Jon smiled.
琼恩笑而不答。
Ben Stark laughed. “As I feared. Ah, well. I believe I was younger than you the first time I got truly and sincerely drunk.” He snagged a roasted onion, dripping brown with gravy, from a nearby trencher and bit into it. It crunched.
班扬·史塔克笑道：“果不出我所料。呵呵，算了。记得我自己第一次喝得酩酊大醉时，年纪比你还小。”他从旁边木餐盘里拣起一颗滴着棕色肉汁的烤洋葱，一口咬将下去，发出松脆的喀嚓声响。
His uncle was sharp-featured and gaunt as a mountain crag, but there was always a hint of laughter in his blue-grey eyes. He dressed in black, as befitted a man of the Night’s Watch. Tonight it was rich black velvet, with high leather boots and a wide belt with a silver buckle. A heavy silver chain was looped round his neck. Benjen watched Ghost with amusement as he ate his onion. “A very quiet wolf,” he observed.
他的叔叔容貌锐利，瘦削有如危岩嶙峋，但他灰蓝色的眼睛里永远带着笑意。他和所有守夜人一样一袭黑衣，今晚他身着厚实的天鹅绒长衫，脚穿皮里高统靴，腰系宽边皮带和镀银扣环，脖间还戴了串沉甸甸的银项链。班扬一边吃洋葱，一边兴味盎然地看着白灵。“很安静的一只狼。”他做出结论。
“He’s not like the others,” Jon said. “He never makes a sound. That’s why I named him Ghost. That, and because he’s white. The others are all dark, grey or black.”
“它和其他几只很不一样，”琼恩说，“从来都一声不吭，所以我才叫它白灵，这也是因为它的毛色，其他几只狼毛色都很深，不是灰就是黑。”
“There are still direwolves beyond the Wall. We hear them on our rangings.” Benjen Stark gave Jon a long look. “Don’t you usually eat at table with your brothers?”
“长城外也有冰原狼，我们外出巡逻时经常听到它们的嚎叫。”班扬·史塔克意味深长地看着琼恩，“你平日不是都和你弟弟他们同桌吃饭吗？”
“Most times,” Jon answered in a flat voice. “But tonight Lady Stark thought it might give insult to the royal family to seat a bastard among them.”
“那是平日，”琼恩语调平板地回答，“夫人认为，今晚若让私生子与他们同桌用餐，对王族是种侮辱。”
“I see.” His uncle glanced over his shoulder at the raised table at the far end of the hall. “My brother does not seem very festive tonight.”
“原来如此。”叔叔转头看看大厅尽头高台上的餐桌，“我哥哥今晚看上去不太有庆祝的兴致。”
Jon had noticed that too. A bastard had to learn to notice things, to read the truth that people hid behind their eyes. His father was observing all the courtesies, but there was tightness in him that Jon had seldom seen before. He said little, looking out over the hall with hooded eyes, seeing nothing. Two seats away, the king had been drinking heavily all night. His broad face was flushed behind his great black beard. He made many a toast, laughed loudly at every jest, and attacked each dish like a starving man, but beside him the queen seemed as cold as an ice sculpture. “The queen is angry too,” Jon told his uncle in a low, quiet voice. “Father took the king down to the crypts this afternoon. The queen didn’t want him to go.”
琼恩也注意到了，私生子必须学会察言观色，洞悉隐藏在人们眼里的喜怒哀乐。他父亲固然举止都合乎礼数，但神情里却有种琼恩从未见过的拘束。他不多说话，始终用低低的眼神扫视全厅，目光十分空洞。隔着两个位子的国王倒是整晚开怀畅饮，络腮胡后那张大脸胀得通红，他不断地举杯敬酒，听了每一个笑话都乐得前仰后合，每一道菜他都像个饿鬼似地吃个不休。但坐在他身旁的王后却如一尊冰冷的雕像。“王后也在生气，”琼恩低声对他叔叔说，“下午父亲大人带国王去了地下陵寝，王后本不希望他去的。”
Benjen gave Jon a careful, measuring look. “You don’t miss much, do you, Jon? We could use a man like you on the Wall.”
班扬仔细地审视了琼恩一番，说：“琼恩，什么事都逃不过你眼光，是么？我们长城守军很需要你这样的人才。”
Jon swelled with pride. “Robb is a stronger lance than I am, but I’m the better sword, and Hullen says I sit a horse as well as anyone in the castle.”
琼恩骄傲地说：“罗柏用起长枪来比我有力，但是我剑使得比较好，胡伦还说我的骑术在城里也是数一数二。”
“Notable achievements.”
“的确很不容易。”
“Take me with you when you go back to the Wall,” Jon said in a sudden rush. “Father will give me leave to go if you ask him, I know he will.”
“你回去的时候，带我一道走罢。”琼恩突然激动起来，“只要你去跟父亲大人说，他一定会同意，我知道他一定会。”
Uncle Benjen studied his face carefully. “The Wall is a hard place for a boy, Jon.”
班扬叔叔再度审视他的脸庞，“琼恩，对一个男孩子来说，长城是个很艰苦的地方。”
“I am almost a man grown,” Jon protested. “I will turn fifteen on my next name day, and Maester Luwin says bastards grow up faster than other children.”
“我差不多成年了，”琼恩辩解，“下个命名日我就满十五岁，而且鲁温师傅说私生子会比其他孩子长得快。”
“That’s true enough,” Benjen said with a downward twist of his mouth. He took Jon’s cup from the table, filled it fresh from a nearby pitcher, and drank down a long swallow.
“这倒是真的。”班扬的嘴角向下微翘，他从桌上拿起琼恩的酒杯，斟满葡萄酒，深吸一口。
“Daeren Targaryen was only fourteen when he conquered Dorne,” Jon said. The Young Dragon was one of his heroes.
“戴伦·坦格利安征服多恩领的时候也不过十四岁。”琼恩又说。传说中的年轻龙王是他心目中的英雄。
“A conquest that lasted a summer,” his uncle pointed out. “Your Boy King lost ten thousand men taking the place, and another fifty trying to hold it. Someone should have told him that war isn’t a game.” He took another sip of wine. “Also,” he said, wiping his mouth, “Daeren Targaryen was only eighteen when he died. Or have you forgotten that part?”
“那场仗可是打了一整个夏天，”叔叔提醒道，“你说的这个年轻国王，为了攻下多恩，死了一万人，后来为了守住它，又死了五万人。应该有人告诉他，战争可不是儿戏。”他又啜了口酒，抹抹嘴，“而且，戴伦·坦格利安十八岁就英年早逝，你该不会忘记这一部分吧？”
“I forget nothing,” Jon boasted. The wine was making him bold. He tried to sit very straight, to make himself seem taller. “I want to serve in the Night’s Watch, Uncle.”
“我什么都没忘，”琼恩吹嘘，酒精让他胆子也大了起来。他试着坐直身子，好让自己看起来更高大，“叔叔，我想进入守夜人部队服役。”
He had thought on it long and hard, lying abed at night while his brothers slept around him. Robb would someday inherit Winterfell, would command great armies as the Warden of the North. Bran and Rickon would be Robb’s bannermen and rule holdfasts in his name. His sisters Arya and Sansa would marry the heirs of other great houses and go south as mistress of castles of their own. But what place could a bastard hope to earn?
对于这个决定，他早已反复思量，夜里，当他的兄弟们在身边安睡酣眠，他却辗转难安。罗柏有朝一日会继承临冬城，以北境守护的身份指挥千军万马。布兰和瑞肯则将成为他的封臣，拥有各自的庄园，为他管理内政。妹妹艾莉亚和珊莎会嫁给其他豪族的子嗣，以贵族夫人的身份前往南方属于她们的领地。惟有他，区区一个私生子，能指望些什么呢？
“You don’t know what you’re asking, Jon. The Night’s Watch is a sworn brotherhood. We have no families. None of us will ever father sons. Our wife is duty. Our mistress is honor.”
“琼恩，你恐怕不知道。守夜人是一个视死如归的团体，我们没有家庭羁绊，永远也不会生儿育女，我们以责任为妻，以荣誉为妾。”
“A bastard can have honor too,” Jon said. “I am ready to swear your oath.”
“私生子一样有荣誉心，”琼恩说，“我已经做好宣誓加入的准备了。”
“You are a boy of fourteen,” Benjen said. “Not a man, not yet. Until you have known a woman, you cannot understand what you would be giving up.”
“你只是个十四岁的孩子，”班扬答道，“还算不上成人。在你接触女人之前，恐怕无法想像要付出的代价有多大。”
“I don’t care about that!” Jon said hotly.
“我才不在乎那个！”琼恩火气直往上撞。
“You might, if you knew what it meant,” Benjen said. “If you knew what the oath would cost you, you might be less eager to pay the price, son.”
“你若是知道，多半就会在乎了。”班扬说，“孩子啊，倘若你知道发了这誓，会有什么样的后果，你就不会这么急着要加入了。”
Jon felt anger rise inside him. “I’m not your son!”
琼恩听了更觉气恼：“我才不是你的孩子！”
Benjen Stark stood up. “More’s the pity.” He put a hand on Jon’s shoulder. “Come back to me after you’ve fathered a few bastards of your own, and we’ll see how you feel.”
班扬·史塔克站起身，“我就可惜你不是我孩子。”他拍拍琼恩肩膀，“等你在外面生了两三个私生子，再来找我，到时候看看自己会有什么想法。”
Jon trembled. “I will never father a bastard,” he said carefully. “Never!” He spat it out like venom.
琼恩浑身颤抖。“我绝不会在外面生什么私生子，”他一字一顿地说，“永远不会！”他将最后一句话当成毒液般吐出口。
Suddenly he realized that the table had fallen silent, and they were all looking at him. He felt the tears begin to well behind his eyes. He pushed himself to his feet.
这时他惊觉全桌的人不知什么时候都静了下来，所有人都盯着他。他只觉泪水充满眼眶，最后他站了起来。
“I must be excused,” he said with the last of his dignity. He whirled and bolted before they could see him cry. He must have drunk more wine than he had realized. His feet got tangled under him as he tried to leave, and he lurched sideways into a serving girl and sent a flagon of spiced wine crashing to the floor. Laughter boomed all around him, and Jon felt hot tears on his cheeks. Someone tried to steady him. He wrenched free of their grip and ran, half-blind, for the door. Ghost followed close at his heels, out into the night.
“恕我先告退。”他用最后一丝尊严说道，然后趁其他人看到他眼泪掉下之前，旋风似地跑开。他一定是喝多了，两只脚仿佛打了结，当即与一位女侍撞个满怀，使一壶掺香料的葡萄酒泼洒在地，四座顿时响起哄堂大笑。琼恩眼中的热泪滚下面颊，有人想搀他，但他甩开善意的手，凭着辨不清地面的眼睛，继续朝大门跑去。白灵紧随其后，奔进低垂的夜幕。
The yard was quiet and empty. A lone sentry stood high on the battlements of the inner wall, his cloak pulled tight around him against the cold. He looked bored and miserable as he huddled there alone, but Jon would have traded places with him in an instant. Otherwise the castle was dark and deserted. Jon had seen an abandoned holdfast once, a drear place where nothing moved but the wind and the stones kept silent about whatever people had lived there. Winterfell reminded him of that tonight.
空荡的庭院分外寂静，内墙城垛上只有一位拉紧斗篷抵御寒意的守卫，独自蜷缩墙角，虽然看上去百无聊赖，表情悲苦，但琼恩却有一千个一万个想和他交换位置的愿望。除此之外，整座孤城四下漆黑，满是寂寥。琼恩曾去过一座被遗弃的庄园，那里杳无人迹、沉默阴郁，四下一片肃然，惟有巨石在默默倾诉过往主人的景况。今夜的临冬城便让琼恩联想起当时的情景。
The sounds of music and song spilled through the open windows behind him. They were the last things Jon wanted to hear. He wiped away his tears on the sleeve of his shirt, furious that he had let them fall, and turned to go.
笙歌舞乐从身后敞开的窗户向外流泻，正是他此刻最不想听的靡靡之音。他用衣袖抹去泪水，气恼自己如何把持不住，随后准备转身离开。
“Boy,” a voice called out to him. Jon turned.
“小子。”有人叫住他。琼恩转头。
Tyrion Lannister was sitting on the ledge above the door to the Great Hall, looking for all the world like a gargoyle. The dwarf grinned down at him. “Is that animal a wolf?”
提利昂·兰尼斯特正坐在厅堂前门上面突出的壁架上，睥睨世间万物，活像只石像鬼。这侏儒朝他笑笑：“你身旁那家伙可是只狼？”
“A direwolf,” Jon said. “His name is Ghost.” He stared up at the little man, his disappointment suddenly forgotten. “What are you doing up there? Why aren’t you at the feast?”
“是冰原狼。”琼恩说，“叫做白灵。”他抬头望着侏儒，先前的不满被好奇取而代之。“你在那儿做什么？怎没在里面参加晚宴呢？”
“Too hot, too noisy, and I’d drunk too much wine,” the dwarf told him. “I learned long ago that it is considered rude to vomit on your brother. Might I have a closer look at your wolf?”
“里面太热太吵，我又多喝了点酒。”侏儒告诉他，“很久以前，我就学到了一个教训：在你的哥哥身上呕吐是件不太礼貌的事。我可以靠近瞧瞧你那只狼吗？”
Jon hesitated, then nodded slowly. “Can you climb down, or shall I bring a ladder?”
琼恩迟疑了一下，然后缓缓点头：“你能自己下来么？还是要我去弄张梯子？”
“Oh, bleed that,” the little man said. He pushed himself off the ledge into empty air. Jon gasped, then watched with awe as Tyrion Lannister spun around in a tight ball, landed lightly on his hands, then vaulted backward onto his legs.
“去，瞧不起我啊？”小个子说。他两手往后一用力，整个人翻腾进半空中。琼恩惊讶得喘不过气，瞠目结舌地看着提利昂紧缩成一个球，轻巧地以手着地，然后后空翻站起身。
Ghost backed away from him uncertainly.
白灵有些迟疑地向后退了几步。
The dwarf dusted himself off and laughed. “I believe I’ve frightened your wolf. My apologies.”
侏儒拍拍身上的灰尘，笑道：“我想我一定是吓着你的小狼了。真不好意思。”
“He’s not scared,” Jon said. He knelt and called out. “Ghost, come here. Come on. That’s it.”
“他才没被吓着。”琼恩边说边弯身唤道：“白灵，过来，快过来，乖。”
The wolf pup padded closer and nuzzled at Jon’s face, but he kept a wary eye on Tyrion Lannister, and when the dwarf reached out to pet him, he drew back and bared his fangs in a silent snarl. “Shy, isn’t he?” Lannister observed.
小狼溜达过来，亲热地用鼻子摩擦琼恩的脸颊，却始终对提利昂·兰尼斯特保持警戒。当侏儒伸手想摸它时，它立刻抽身后退，露出利齿，发出无声的咆哮。“挺怕生的么？”兰尼斯特说。
“Sit, Ghost,” Jon commanded. “That’s it. Keep still.” He looked up at the dwarf. “You can touch him now. He won’t move until I tell him to. I’ve been training him.”
“白灵，坐下。”琼恩命令，“就是这样，坐着别乱动。”他抬头望向侏儒，“你现在可以摸他了。除非我叫它动，否则他不会乱动的。我正在训练他。”
“I see,” Lannister said. He ruffled the snow-white fur between Ghost’s ears and said, “Nice wolf.”
“原来如此。”兰尼斯特搔搔白灵两耳间白如细雪的绒毛，“乖狼狼。”
“If I wasn’t here, he’d tear out your throat,” Jon said. It wasn’t actually true yet, but it would be.
“若我不在这里，他早把你的喉咙撕开了。”琼恩说。其实这话当下还不能成真，不过看小狼的长势却也为时不远。
“In that case, you had best stay close,” the dwarf said. He cocked his oversized head to one side and looked Jon over with his mismatched eyes. “I am Tyrion Lannister.”
“如果这样，那你还是别走开的好。”侏儒答道。他歪了歪那颗过大的脑袋，用那双大小不一的眼睛仔细打量琼恩，“我是提利昂·兰尼斯特。”
“I know,” Jon said. He rose. Standing, he was taller than the dwarf. It made him feel strange.
“我知道。”琼恩边说边起身。他站着比那侏儒高多了，不禁觉得很怪异。
“You’re Ned Stark’s bastard, aren’t you?”
“你是奈德·史塔克的私生子吧？”
Jon felt a coldness pass right through him. He pressed his lips together and said nothing.
琼恩只觉得一股寒意刺进全身，他抿紧嘴唇，没有答话。
“Did I offend you?” Lannister said. “Sorry. Dwarfs don’t have to be tactful. Generations of capering fools in motley have won me the right to dress badly and say any damn thing that comes into my head.” He grinned. “You are the bastard, though.”
“我冒犯到你了吗？”兰尼斯特忙道，“抱歉，侏儒向来不太懂得察言观色。反正历来杂耍卖艺的侏儒前辈们个个衣着随便，口无遮拦，我也就有样学样啦。”他嘿嘿笑着，“不过你确实是个私生子。”
“Lord Eddard Stark is my father,” Jon admitted stiffly.
“艾德·史塔克大人是我父亲没错。”琼恩终于还是承认了。
Lannister studied his face. “Yes,” he said. “I can see it. You have more of the north in you than your brothers.”
“嗯，”兰尼斯特端详着他的脸，“看得出来。跟你那些兄弟相比，你还比较有北方人的味道。”
“Half brothers,” Jon corrected. He was pleased by the dwarf’s comment, but he tried not to let it show.
“同父异母的兄弟。”琼恩纠正，心里暗暗为侏儒的说法感到高兴。
“Let me give you some counsel, bastard,” Lannister said. “Never forget what you are, for surely the world will not. Make it your strength. Then it can never be your weakness. Armor yourself in it, and it will never be used to hurt you.”
“那么私生子小弟，让我给你一点建议罢。”兰尼斯特道，“永远不要忘记自己是什么人，因为这个世界不会忘记。你要化阻力为助力，如此一来才没有弱点。用它来武装自己，就没有人可以用它来伤害你。”
Jon was in no mood for anyone’s counsel. “What do you know about being a bastard?”
琼恩可没心情听人说教：“你又知道身为私生子是什么样了？”
“All dwarfs are bastards in their father’s eyes.”
“全天下的侏儒，在他们父亲眼里都跟私生子没两样。”
“You are your mother’s trueborn son of Lannister.”
“你可是你母亲的亲生儿子，地地道道的兰尼斯特。”
“Am I?” the dwarf replied, sardonic. “Do tell my lord father. My mother died birthing me, and he’s never been sure.”
“是么？”侏儒苦笑，“这话你去跟我父亲大人说吧。我妈生我的时候难产而死，所以我老爸始终不确定我是不是他亲生的。”
“I don’t even know who my mother was,” Jon said.
“我连我母亲是谁都不知道。”琼恩道。
“Some woman, no doubt. Most of them are.” He favored Jon with a rueful grin. “Remember this, boy. All dwarfs may be bastards, yet not all bastards need be dwarfs.” And with that he turned and sauntered back into the feast, whistling a tune. When he opened the door, the light from within threw his shadow clear across the yard, and for just a moment Tyrion Lannister stood tall as a king.
“反正是个女人。”他朝琼恩露出一抹哀伤的笑容，“小子，请记住，虽然全天下的侏儒都可能被视为私生子，私生子却不见得要被人视为侏儒。”说完，他转过身，驼着背返回宴会大厅，嘴里还哼起一首爱情小调。当他打开门的刹那，室内的灯光将他的背影清楚地洒在庭院中。就在那一瞬间，提利昂·兰尼斯特的身影宛如帝王般昂首挺立。
*CATELYN
第七章 凯特琳
O f all the rooms in Winterfell’s Great Keep, Catelyn’s bedchambers were the hottest. She seldom had to light a fire. The castle had been built over natural hot springs, and the scalding waters rushed through its walls and chambers like blood through a man’s body, driving the chill from the stone halls, filling the glass gardens with a moist warmth, keeping the earth from freezing. Open pools smoked day and night in a dozen small courtyards. That was a little thing, in summer; in winter, it was the difference between life and death.
在临冬城主堡所有的房间里，就属凯特琳的卧室最是闷热，以至于当时鲜少有生火取暖的必要。城堡立基于天然的温泉之上，蒸腾热水如同人体内的血液般流贯高墙寝室，将寒意驱出石材大厅，使玻璃花园充满湿气与暖意，让土壤不致结冻。十几个较小的露天庭院中，温泉日夜蒸腾。夏日里，这或许无足轻重，但到了冬季，却往往是生与死的差别。
Catelyn’s bath was always hot and steaming, and her walls warm to the touch. The warmth reminded her of Riverrun, of days in the sun with Lysa and Edmure, but Ned could never abide the heat. The Starks were made for the cold, he would tell her, and she would laugh and tell him in that case they had certainly built their castle in the wrong place.
凯特琳喜欢把洗澡水弄得滚烫炙热、蒸汽四溢，而她选择的居室四周墙壁摸起来也一向很温暖。只因这种温暖能勾起她对于奔流城的回忆，让她想起那段在艳阳底下，与莱莎和艾德慕嘻闹奔逐的日子，只是奈德始终无法忍受这种热度。他总告诉她，史塔克家族的人生来就要与冰天雪地为伍，而她也总会笑答：倘若真是这样，那么他们的城堡真是盖错了地方。
So when they had finished, Ned rolled off and climbed from her bed, as he had a thousand times before. He crossed the room, pulled back the heavy tapestries, and threw open the high narrow windows one by one, letting the night air into the chamber.
所以，当他们完事之后，奈德便翻过身，从她床上爬起来，如以前千百次一样走过房间，拉开厚重的织锦帷幕，把高处的窄窗一扇扇推开，让夜里的寒意灌进卧房。
The wind swirled around him as he stood facing the dark, naked and empty-handed. Catelyn pulled the furs to her chin and watched him. He looked somehow smaller and more vulnerable, like the youth she had wed in the sept at Riverrun, fifteen long years gone. Her loins still ached from the urgency of his lovemaking. It was a good ache. She could feel his seed within her. She prayed that it might quicken there. It had been three years since Rickon. She was not too old. She could give him another son.
他静静伫立窗边，全身赤裸，手无长物，独向漫天的幽暗长空，冷风在他身边穿梭呼啸。凯特琳拉过温暖的毛皮，盖到下巴，默默地看着丈夫，觉得他看起来似乎变得瘦小又脆弱，仿佛突然之间又成了那个自己十五年前在奔流城圣堂托付一生的年轻人。她的下体仍然因为刚才他剧烈的动作而疼痛，但这是一种感觉美好的疼痛，她可以感觉到他的种子在自己体内。她祈祷种子能开花结果。生完瑞肯已是三年前的事了，她年纪还轻，可以再为他添个儿子。
“I will refuse him,” Ned said as he turned back to her. His eyes were haunted, his voice thick with doubt.
“我拒绝他就是。”他边说边转身面向她，眼神阴霾不开，语调充满疑虑。
Catelyn sat up in the bed. “You cannot. You must not.”
凯特琳从床上坐起来：“不行，你不能拒绝。”
“My duties are here in the north. I have no wish to be Robert’s Hand.”
“我的责任在这里、在北方，我无意接任劳勃的首相一职。”
“He will not understand that. He is a king now, and kings are not like other men. If you refuse to serve him, he will wonder why, and sooner or later he will begin to suspect that you oppose him. Can’t you see the danger that would put us in?”
“他才不懂这些，他现在是国王了，国王可不能当常人看待。倘若你拒绝了他，他定会纳闷其原因，随后迟早会怀疑你是否包藏二心。你难道看不出拒绝之后，可能为我们带来的危险吗？”
Ned shook his head, refusing to believe. “Robert would never harm me or any of mine. We were closer than brothers. He loves me. If I refuse him, he will roar and curse and bluster, and in a week we will laugh about it together. I know the man!”
奈德摇摇头：“劳勃绝不会做出对我或我家人不利的事。他爱我更胜亲兄弟，假如我拒绝，他会暴跳如雷，骂不绝口，但一个星期之后我们便会对这件事嗤之以鼻。他这个人我清楚！”
“You knew the man,” she said. “The king is a stranger to you.” Catelyn remembered the direwolf dead in the snow, the broken antler lodged deep in her throat. She had to make him see. “Pride is everything to a king, my lord. Robert came all this way to see you, to bring you these great honors, you cannot throw them back in his face.”
“你清楚的是过去的他，”她答道，“现在的国王对你来言，已经成了陌生人。”凯特琳想起倒卧雪地的那头冰原狼，想起喉咙里深插的鹿角。她得想办法让他认清事实。“大人，国王的自尊是他的一切，劳勃不远千里来看望你，为你带来如此至高无上的荣誉，你说什么也不能断然拒绝，这等于当众摔他一个耳光呀。”
“Honors?” Ned laughed bitterly.
“荣誉？”奈德苦涩地笑道。
“In his eyes, yes,” she said.
“在他眼里，没有更高的荣誉了。”她回答。
“And in yours?”
“在你眼里呢？”
“And in mine,” she blazed, angry now. Why couldn’t he see? “He offers his own son in marriage to our daughter, what else would you call that? Sansa might someday be queen. Her sons could rule from the Wall to the mountains of Dorne. What is so wrong with that?”
“在我眼里也一样！”她叱道，突然间生气起来。他为什么就不懂呢？“他愿意让自己的长子迎娶珊莎，还有什么能比这更光荣？珊莎有朝一日说不定会成为王后，她的孩子们将统治北起绝境长城，南及多恩峻岭的辽阔土地，这难道不好么？”
“Gods, Catelyn, Sansa is only eleven,” Ned said. “And Joffrey … Joffrey is …”
“老天，凯特琳，珊莎才十一岁，”奈德说，“而乔佛里……乔佛里他……”
She finished for him. “… crown prince, and heir to the Iron Throne. And I was only twelve when my father promised me to your brother Brandon.”
她忙接口：“他是当今王太子，铁王座的继承人。我父亲将我许配给你哥哥布兰登的时候，我也不过十二岁。”
That brought a bitter twist to Ned’s mouth. “Brandon. Yes. Brandon would know what to do. He always did. It was all meant for Brandon. You, Winterfell, everything. He was born to be a King’s Hand and a father to queens. I never asked for this cup to pass to me.”
这话引起了奈德嘴角苦涩的牵动，“布兰登，是啊，布兰登知道怎么做，他做什么都充满自信，成竹在胸。你和临冬城本来都该是布兰登的。他是个当首相和作王后父亲的料。我可从没说过要喝这杯苦酒。”
“Perhaps not,” Catelyn said, “but Brandon is dead, and the cup has passed, and you must drink from it, like it or not.”
“也许你没有，”凯特琳说，“但布兰登早已不在人世，酒杯也已经传到你手中，不管喜不喜欢，你都非喝不可。”
Ned turned away from her, back to the night. He stood staring out in the darkness, watching the moon and the stars perhaps, or perhaps the sentries on the wall.
奈德再度转身，返回暗夜之中。他站在原地望着屋外的黑暗，或许在凝视月光星辰，或许在瞭望城上哨兵。
Catelyn softened then, to see his pain. Eddard Stark had married her in Brandon’s place, as custom decreed, but the shadow of his dead brother still lay between them, as did the other, the shadow of the woman he would not name, the woman who had borne him his bastard son.
见他受了伤，凯特琳缓和下来。依照习俗，艾德·史塔克代替布兰登娶了她，然而他过世兄长的阴影仍旧夹在两人之间，就像另一个女人的阴影，一个他不愿说出名字，却为他生下私生子的女人。
She was about to go to him when the knock came at the door, loud and unexpected. Ned turned, frowning. “What is it?”
她正准备起身走到他身旁，敲门声却突然传来，在这样的时刻显得尤为刺耳，出乎意料。奈德回身，皱眉道：“是谁？”
Desmond’s voice came through the door. “My lord, Maester Luwin is without and begs urgent audience.”
戴斯蒙的声音从门外传来：“老爷，鲁温学士在外面，说有急事求见。”
“You told him I had left orders not to be disturbed?”
“你有没跟他讲，我交代不准任何人打扰？”
“Yes, my lord. He insists.”
“有的，老爷，不过他坚持要见您一面。”
“Very well. Send him in.”
“好罢，让他进来。”
Ned crossed to the wardrobe and slipped on a heavy robe. Catelyn realized suddenly how cold it had become. She sat up in bed and pulled the furs to her chin. “Perhaps we should close the windows,” she suggested.
奈德走到衣橱前，披上一件厚重的长袍。凯特琳这才突然惊觉到屋里的寒意，她在床上坐起身子，把毛毯拉到下巴。“我们是不是该把窗子关起来？”她建议。
Ned nodded absently. Maester Luwin was shown in.
奈德心不在焉地点点头，鲁温学士已经被带进来了。
The maester was a small grey man. His eyes were grey, and quick, and saw much. His hair was grey, what little the years had left him. His robe was grey wool, trimmed with white fur, the Stark colors. Its great floppy sleeves had pockets hidden inside. Luwin was always tucking things into those sleeves and producing other things from them: books, messages, strange artifacts, toys for the children. With all he kept hidden in his sleeves, Catelyn was surprised that Maester Luwin could lift his arms at all.
学士是个瘦小的人，一身灰色。他的眼睛是灰色，但眼神敏锐，少有东西能逃过他的注意；岁月给他残留的头发也是灰的；他的长袍是灰色羊毛织成的，镶滚着白色绒边，正是史塔克家的色彩。宽大的袖子里藏有许许多多的口袋，鲁温总是忙不迭地把东西放进袖子，不时能从里面拿出书、信笺、古怪的法器、孩子们的玩具等等。想到鲁温师傅袖子里放了那么多东西，凯特琳很惊讶他的手还能活动。
The maester waited until the door had closed behind him before he spoke. “My lord,” he said to Ned, “pardon for disturbing your rest. I have been left a message.”
学士直等到身后的门关上之后方才开口：“老爷，”他对奈德说，“请原谅我打扰你们休息，有人留给我一封信。”
Ned looked irritated. “Been left? By whom? Has there been a rider? I was not told.”
奈德面带愠色地问：“有人留给你一封信？谁留的？今天有信使来过？我如何不知情？”
“There was no rider, my lord. Only a carved wooden box, left on a table in my observatory while I napped. My servants saw no one, but it must have been brought by someone in the king’s party. We have had no other visitors from the south.”
“老爷，不是信使带来的。有人趁我打盹时，把一个雕工精巧的木盒放在我观星室的书桌上。我的仆人说没看到人进出，但想来一定是跟国王一道的人留下的，我们没有其他从南方来的访客。”
“A wooden box, you say?” Catelyn said.
“你说是个木盒子？”凯特琳问。
“Inside was a fine new lens for the observatory, from Myr by the look of it. The lenscrafters of Myr are without equal.”
“里面装了个精美的透镜，专用于观星，看来应该是密尔的做工。密尔产的透镜可称举世无双。”
Ned frowned. He had little patience for this sort of thing, Catelyn knew. “A lens,” he said. “What has that to do with me?”
奈德又皱起眉头，凯特琳知道他对这类琐事一向毫无耐性。“透镜？”他说，“这与我有何关系？”
“I asked the same question,” Maester Luwin said. “Clearly there was more to this than the seeming.”
“当时，我也抱着相同的疑问，”鲁温师傅道，“显然这里面暗藏玄机。”
Under the heavy weight of her furs, Catelyn shivered. “A lens is an instrument to help us see.”
躲在厚重毛皮下的凯特琳颤抖着说：“透镜的用途是看清真相。”
“Indeed it is.” He fingered the collar of his order; a heavy chain worn tight around the neck beneath his robe, each link forged from a different metal.
“没错。”学士摸了摸象征自己身份的项圈，那是一串用许多片不同金属打造而成的沉重项链。
Catelyn could feel dread stirring inside her once again. “What is it that they would have us see more clearly?”
凯特琳只觉一股恐惧从心底升起。“那究竟想让我们看清什么呢？”
“The very thing I asked myself.” Maester Luwin drew a tightly rolled paper out of his sleeve. “I found the true message concealed within a false bottom when I dismantled the box the lens had come in, but it is not for my eyes.”
“这正是问题所在。”鲁温学士从衣袖里取出一封卷得密密实实的信笺。“于是我把整个木盒分解开来，在假的盒底找到真正的信。不过这封信不是给我的。”
Ned held out his hand. “Let me have it, then.”
奈德伸出手：“那就交给我罢。”
Luwin did not stir. “Pardons, my lord. The message is not for you either. It is marked for the eyes of the Lady Catelyn, and her alone. May I approach?”
鲁温学士没有反应。“老爷，很抱歉，可信也不是给您的。上面清楚写着只能让凯特琳夫人拆看。我可以把信送过去吗？”
Catelyn nodded, not trusting to speak. The maester placed the paper on the table beside the bed. It was sealed with a small blob of blue wax. Luwin bowed and began to retreat.
凯特琳点点头，没有答话。鲁温把信放在她床边的矮桌上，信封乃是用一滴蓝色蜡油封笺。鲁温鞠了个躬，准备告退。
“Stay,” Ned commanded him. His voice was grave. He looked at Catelyn. “What is it? My lady, you’re shaking.”
“留下来。”奈德语气沉重地命令，他看看凯特琳。“夫人，怎么了？你在发抖。”
“I’m afraid,” she admitted. She reached out and took the letter in trembling hands. The furs dropped away from her nakedness, forgotten. In the blue wax was the moon-and-falcon seal of House Arryn. “It’s from Lysa.” Catelyn looked at her husband. “It will not make us glad,” she told him. “There is grief in this message, Ned. I can feel it.”
“我害怕啊。”她坦承。她伸出颤抖的双手拿起信封，皮毛从她身上滑落，她完全忘记了自己赤裸的身体。只见蓝色封蜡上印有艾林家族的新月猎鹰家徽。“是莱莎写的信，”凯特琳看着她丈夫说，“只怕不会是什么好消息。”她告诉他，“奈德，这封信里蕴藏着无尽的哀伤，我感觉得出来。”
Ned frowned, his face darkening. “Open it.”
奈德双眉深锁，脸色转阴。“拆开。”
Catelyn broke the seal.
凯特琳揭开封印。
Her eyes moved over the words. At first they made no sense to her. Then she remembered. “Lysa took no chances. When we were girls together, we had a private language, she and I.”
她的眼神扫过内文，起初看不出所以，随后才猛然醒悟：“莱莎行事谨慎，不肯冒险。我们年幼时发明了一种秘密语言，只有我和她懂。”
“Can you read it?”
“那你能否读出信上的内容？”
“Yes,” Catelyn admitted.
“能。”凯特琳表示。
“Then tell us.”
“告诉我们。”
“Perhaps I should withdraw,” Maester Luwin said.
“我想我还是先告退为好。”鲁温学士道。
“No,” Catelyn said. “We will need your counsel.” She threw back the furs and climbed from the bed. The night air was as cold as the grave on her bare skin as she padded across the room.
“不，”凯特琳说，“我们需要你的意见。”她掀开毛皮，翻身下床，走到房间的另一头。午夜的冷气寒彻心肺，凄冷有如坟墓。
Maester Luwin averted his eyes. Even Ned looked shocked. “What are you doing?” he asked.
鲁温学士见状立刻别过头去，连奈德都被她突如其来的举动给吓住。“你要做什么？”他问。
“Lighting a fire,” Catelyn told him. She found a dressing gown and shrugged into it, then knelt over the cold hearth.
“生火。”凯特琳告诉他。她从衣柜里找出一件睡袍，披上之后在早已冷却的火炉前蹲了下来。
“Maester Luwin—” Ned began.
“鲁温师傅……”奈德开口。
“Maester Luwin has delivered all my children,” Catelyn said. “This is no time for false modesty.” She slid the paper in among the kindling and placed the heavier logs on top of it.
“我每一个孩子都是鲁温师傅接生的，”凯特琳道，“现在可不是讲究虚伪礼数的时候。”说完她把信纸塞进甫燃的火中，然后将几根粗木堆在上面。
Ned crossed the room, took her by the arm, and pulled her to her feet. He held her there, his face inches from her. “My lady, tell me! What was this message?”
奈德走过房间，挽着她的胳膊，把她扶起。他的手紧握她不放，脸离她只有几寸。“夫人，快告诉我！信里面究竟写了些什么？”
Catelyn stiffened in his grasp. “A warning,” she said softly. “If we have the wits to hear.”
凯特琳在他的逼问下浑身僵直。“那是封警告信，”她轻声道，“如果我们够聪明，听得进去的话。”
His eyes searched her face. “Go on.”
他的眼神在她脸上搜索。“请说下去。”
“Lysa says Jon Arryn was murdered.”
“莱莎说琼恩·艾林乃是被人谋害。”
His fingers tightened on her arm. “By whom?”
他的手指握得更紧。“被谁谋害？”
“The Lannisters,” she told him. “The queen.”
“兰尼斯特家。”她告诉他说，“当今的王后。”
Ned released his hold on her arm. There were deep red marks on her skin. “Gods,” he whispered. His voice was hoarse. “Your sister is sick with grief. She cannot know what she is saying.”
奈德松开手，她的臂膀上留下了鲜明的深红指印。“老天，”他粗声低语，“你妹妹伤心过度，她根本不知道自己在说些什么。”
“She knows,” Catelyn said. “Lysa is impulsive, yes, but this message was carefully planned, cleverly hidden. She knew it meant death if her letter fell into the wrong hands. To risk so much, she must have had more than mere suspicion.” Catelyn looked to her husband. “Now we truly have no choice. You must be Robert’s Hand. You must go south with him and learn the truth.”
“她当然知道，”凯特琳道，“莱莎本人是很冲动，但这封信乃是经过精密策划，小心隐藏的。她一定很清楚信若是落入他人手里，她必死无疑，可见这绝非空穴来风，否则她不会甘冒这么大的风险。”凯特琳注视着她的丈夫，“这下我们真的别无选择，你非当劳勃的首相不可，你得亲自南下去查个水落石出。”
She saw at once that Ned had reached a very different conclusion. “The only truths I know are here. The south is a nest of adders I would do better to avoid.”
她立即明白奈德已然下了个截然相反的结论。“我知道的是，南方是个充满毒蛇猛兽的地方，我还是避开为宜。”
Luwin plucked at his chain collar where it had chafed the soft skin of his throat. “The Hand of the King has great power, my lord. Power to find the truth of Lord Arryn’s death, to bring his killers to the king’s justice. Power to protect Lady Arryn and her son, if the worst be true.”
鲁温拨了拨项链刮伤喉咙皮肤的地方：“老爷，御前首相握有大权，足以查出艾林公爵的真正死因，并将凶手绳之以法。就算情况不妙，要保护艾林夫人和她的幼子，却也绰绰有余。”
Ned glanced helplessly around the bedchamber. Catelyn’s heart went out to him, but she knew she could not take him in her arms just then. First the victory must be won, for her children’s sake. “You say you love Robert like a brother. Would you leave your brother surrounded by Lannisters?”
奈德无助地环视房间四周，凯特琳的心也随着他的视线飘移，但她知道此刻还不能拥他入怀。为了她的子女着想，她必须先打赢眼前这场仗。“你说你爱劳勃胜过亲生兄弟，你难道忍心眼看自家兄弟被兰尼斯特家的人包围吗？”
“The Others take both of you,” Ned muttered darkly. He turned away from them and went to the window. She did not speak, nor did the maester. They waited, quiet, while Eddard Stark said a silent farewell to the home he loved. When he turned away from the window at last, his voice was tired and full of melancholy, and moisture glittered faintly in the corners of his eyes. “My father went south once, to answer the summons of a king. He never came home again.”
“你们两个都叫异鬼给抓去吧。”奈德喃喃咒道。他转身背对他们两人，径往窗边走去。她没有开口，学士也一言不发。他们默默地等待奈德向他挚爱的家园静静地道别，当他终于从窗边回首时，他的声音是如此疲惫而感伤，眼角也微微湿润，“我父亲一生之中只去过南方一次，就是响应国王的召唤。结果一去不返。”
“A different time,” Maester Luwin said. “A different king.”
“时局不同，”鲁温师傅道，“国王也不一样。”
“Yes,” Ned said dully. He seated himself in a chair by the hearth. “Catelyn, you shall stay here in Winterfell.”
“是吗？”奈德木然地应了一声，在火炉边找了张椅子坐下。“凯特琳，你留在临冬城。”
His words were like an icy draft through her heart. “No,” she said, suddenly afraid. Was this to be her punishment? Never to see his face again, nor to feel his arms around her?
他的话有如寒冰刺进她心口。“不要。”她突然害怕起来，难道这是对她的惩罚？再也见不到他？再也得不到他的温情拥抱？
“Yes,” Ned said, in words that would brook no argument. “You must govern the north in my stead, while I run Robert’s errands. There must always be a Stark in Winterfell. Robb is fourteen. Soon enough, he will be a man grown. He must learn to rule, and I will not be here for him. Make him part of your councils. He must be ready when his time comes.”
“一定要。”奈德的语气不容许任何辩驳。“我南下辅佐劳勃期间，你必须代替我管理北方。无论如何，临冬城一定得有史塔克家的人坐镇。罗柏已经十四岁，很快就会长大成人，他得开始学习如何统御，而我没法陪在他身边教导他。你要让他参与你的机要会议。在需要独当一面的时刻来临前，他必须做好万全的准备。”
“Gods will, not for many years,” Maester Luwin murmured.
“诸神保佑，让您早日回来。”鲁温学士嗫嚅道。
“Maester Luwin, I trust you as I would my own blood. Give my wife your voice in all things great and small. Teach my son the things he needs to know. Winter is coming.”
“鲁温师傅，我一直把你当成自己血亲骨肉一般看待，请不论事情大小，都给我妻子意见，并教导我的孩子必须了解的知识。别忘记，凛冬将至。”
Maester Luwin nodded gravely. Then silence fell, until Catelyn found her courage and asked the question whose answer she most dreaded. “What of the other children?”
鲁温师傅沉重地点点头，屋里又复归寂静，直到凯特琳鼓起勇气问了她最害怕听到答案的问题：“其他孩子呢？”
Ned stood, and took her in his arms, and held her face close to his. “Rickon is very young,” he said gently. “He should stay here with you and Robb. The others I would take with me.”
奈德站起身，拥她入怀，捧着她的脸靠近自己说：“瑞肯年纪还小，”他温柔地说，“他留在这里跟你和罗柏作伴。其他孩子跟我一起南下。”
“I could not bear it,” Catelyn said, trembling.
“这样子我承受不了。”她颤抖着回答。
“You must,” he said. “Sansa must wed Joffrey, that is clear now, we must give them no grounds to suspect our devotion. And it is past time that Arya learned the ways of a southron court. In a few years she will be of an age to marry too.”
“你必须忍耐。”他说：“珊莎要嫁给乔佛里，这已经是既成的事实，我们绝不能留下让他们怀疑忠诚的口实。艾莉亚也早该学学南方宫廷仕女的规矩和礼节，再过几年，她也要准备出嫁了。”
Sansa would shine in the south, Catelyn thought to herself, and the gods knew that Arya needed refinement. Reluctantly, she let go of them in her heart. But not Bran. Never Bran. “Yes,” she said, “but please, Ned, for the love you bear me, let Bran remain here at Winterfell. He is only seven.”
珊莎在南方会成为一颗璀璨耀眼的明珠，凯特琳心想，而艾莉亚确实需要好好学点规矩。于是她很不情愿地暂时抛开心中对两个女儿的执着，但是布兰不能走，布兰一定要留下来。“好罢，”她说，“但是奈德，看在你对我的爱的份上，求求你让布兰留在临冬城，他才七岁呀。”
“I was eight when my father sent me to foster at the Eyrie,” Ned said. “Ser Rodrik tells me there is bad feeling between Robb and Prince Joffrey. That is not healthy. Bran can bridge that distance. He is a sweet boy, quick to laugh, easy to love. Let him grow up with the young princes, let him become their friend as Robert became mine. Our House will be the safer for it.”
“当年我父亲把我送去鹰巢城做养子时，我也只有八岁。”奈德道，“罗德利克爵士说罗柏和乔佛里王子处得不太好，这可不是好现象。布兰恰好可以成为两家之间的桥梁，他是个可爱的孩子，笑容满面，讨人喜欢，让他和王子们一同长大，自然而然地产生友谊，就像当年我和劳勃一样，如此一来我们家族的地位也会更加安全稳固。”
He was right; Catelyn knew it. It did not make the pain any easier to bear. She would lose all four of them, then: Ned, and both girls, and her sweet, loving Bran. Only Robb and little Rickon would be left to her. She felt lonely already. Winterfell was such a vast place. “Keep him off the walls, then,” she said bravely. “You know how Bran loves to climb.”
凯特琳很清楚他说的是实话，但她的痛苦却并未因此而稍减。眼看着她就要失去他们全部：奈德、两个女儿，还有她最疼惜的心肝宝贝布兰，只剩下罗柏和瑞肯。此刻的她已感寂寞，临冬城毕竟是个很大的地方啊。“那就别让他靠墙太近，”她勇敢地说，“你知道布兰最爱爬上爬下。”
Ned kissed the tears from her eyes before they could fall. “Thank you, my lady,” he whispered. “This is hard, I know.”
奈德轻吻了她眼里还未掉下的泪滴。“谢谢你，我亲爱的夫人，”他悄声道，“我知道这很痛苦。”
“What of Jon Snow, my lord?” Maester Luwin asked.
“老爷，琼恩·雪诺该怎么办？”鲁温学士问。
Catelyn tensed at the mention of the name. Ned felt the anger in her, and pulled away.
一听这名字，凯特琳立刻全身僵硬。奈德察觉到她的怒意，便抽身放开她。
Many men fathered bastards. Catelyn had grown up with that knowledge. It came as no surprise to her, in the first year of her marriage, to learn that Ned had fathered a child on some girl chance met on campaign. He had a man’s needs, after all, and they had spent that year apart, Ned off at war in the south while she remained safe in her father’s castle at Riverrun. Her thoughts were more of Robb, the infant at her breast, than of the husband she scarcely knew. He was welcome to whatever solace he might find between battles. And if his seed quickened, she expected he would see to the child’s needs.
凯特琳打小就知道，贵族男子在外偷生私生子是常有的事，因此她在新婚不久，得知奈德在作战途中与农家少女生了个私生子时，丝毫不感意外。再怎么说，奈德有他男人的需求，而他征战的那一年，只和她婚后团聚数日便匆匆南下，留她安然地待在后方父亲的奔流城，两人分隔两地。那时她的心思都放在襁褓中的罗柏身上，甚少念及她几乎不认识的丈夫。他在戎马倥偬间，自然不免寻求慰藉。而一旦他留下了种，她也希望他至少能让那孩子衣食无虞。
He did more than that. The Starks were not like other men. Ned brought his bastard home with him, and called him “son” for all the north to see. When the wars were over at last, and Catelyn rode to Winterfell, Jon and his wet nurse had already taken up residence.
但他做的不只如此，史塔克家和别人不一样，奈德把他的私生子带回家来，在众人面前叫他“儿子”。当战争终于结束，凯特琳返回临冬城时，琼恩和他的奶妈已经在城里住了下来。
That cut deep. Ned would not speak of the mother, not so much as a word, but a castle has no secrets, and Catelyn heard her maids repeating tales they heard from the lips of her husband’s soldiers. They whispered of Ser Arthur Dayne, the Sword of the Morning, deadliest of the seven knights of Aerys’s Kingsguard, and of how their young lord had slain him in single combat. And they told how afterward Ned had carried Ser Arthur’s sword back to the beautiful young sister who awaited him in a castle called Starfall on the shores of the Summer Sea. The Lady Ashara Dayne, tall and fair, with haunting violet eyes. It had taken her a fortnight to marshal her courage, but finally, in bed one night, Catelyn had asked her husband the truth of it, asked him to his face.
这件事伤她很深，奈德非但不肯说出孩子的母亲，连关系情形半个字也不跟她提。然而城堡里没有不透风的墙，凯特琳很快就从她的侍女群中听说了几种揣测，这些都是从跟随她丈夫打仗的士兵嘴里传出来的。她们交头接耳说着外号“拂晓神剑”的亚瑟·戴恩爵士，说他是伊里斯麾下御林七铁卫中武艺最高强的骑士，但他们的年轻主子却在一对一的决斗中击毙了他。她们还绘声绘影地叙述事后奈德是如何地带着亚瑟爵士的佩剑，前往盛夏海岸的星坠城寻找亚瑟的妹妹。她们说亚夏拉·戴恩小姐皮肤白皙，身材高挑，一双紫罗兰色的眸子深邃而幽冷。她想了两个星期才终于鼓起勇气，某天夜里在床上向丈夫当面问起。
That was the only time in all their years that Ned had ever frightened her. “Never ask me about Jon,” he said, cold as ice. “He is my blood, and that is all you need to know. And now I will learn where you heard that name, my lady.” She had pledged to obey; she told him; and from that day on, the whispering had stopped, and Ashara Dayne’s name was never heard in Winterfell again.
然而，那却是两人结婚多年以来，奈德惟一吓着她的一次。“永远不要跟我问起琼恩的事，”他的口气寒冷如冰，“他是我的亲生骨肉，你只需知道这点就够了。现在，夫人，我要知道你是打哪儿听来这名字的。”她向他保证以后不会再提起这件事，于是便把消息来源告诉了他。翌日起，城中一切谣言戛然而止，临冬城中从此再听不到亚夏拉·戴恩这个名字。
Whoever Jon’s mother had been, Ned must have loved her fiercely, for nothing Catelyn said would persuade him to send the boy away. It was the one thing she could never forgive him. She had come to love her husband with all her heart, but she had never found it in her to love Jon. She might have overlooked a dozen bastards for Ned’s sake, so long as they were out of sight. Jon was never out of sight, and as he grew, he looked more like Ned than any of the trueborn sons she bore him. Somehow that made it worse. “Jon must go,” she said now.
无论琼恩的生母是谁，奈德对她铁定是一往情深，因为不管凯特琳说好说歹，就是没法说服他把孩子送走。这是她永远不会原谅他的一件事。她已经学着全心全意去爱自己丈夫，但她怎么也无法对琼恩产生感情。其实只要别在她眼前出现，奈德爱在外面生多少私生子她都可以睁一只眼闭一只眼。然而琼恩却总是看得见摸得着，怎么看怎么碍眼，更糟的是他越长越像奈德，竟比她生的几个儿子都还要像父亲。“琼恩非走不可。”她回答。
“He and Robb are close,” Ned said. “I had hoped …”
“他和罗柏感情很好，”奈德说，“我本来希望……”
“He cannot stay here,” Catelyn said, cutting him off. “He is your son, not mine. I will not have him.” It was hard, she knew, but no less the truth. Ned would do the boy no kindness by leaving him here at Winterfell.
“他绝不能留下来。”凯特琳打断他，“他是你儿子，可不是我的，我不会让他留在这里。”她知道自己这样有些过分，但她也是实话实说。奈德倘若真把他留在临冬城，对那孩子本身也无好处。
The look Ned gave her was anguished. “You know I cannot take him south. There will be no place for him at court. A boy with a bastard’s name … you know what they will say of him. He will be shunned.”
奈德看她的眼神里充满痛楚。“你也知道我不能带他南下，朝廷里根本没他容身之处。一个冠着私生子姓氏的孩子……你应该很清楚旁人会如何闲言闲语。他会被排挤。”
Catelyn armored her heart against the mute appeal in her husband’s eyes. “They say your friend Robert has fathered a dozen bastards himself.”
凯特琳再次武装起自己，对抗丈夫眼底无声的诉求：“我听说你的好朋友劳勃在外面也生了不少私生子。”
“And none of them has ever been seen at court!” Ned blazed. “The Lannister woman has seen to that. How can you be so damnably cruel, Catelyn? He is only a boy. He—”
“但一个也没在宫廷里出现过！”奈德怒道，“那个兰尼斯特家的女人很坚持这一点，天杀的，凯特琳，你怎么狠得下心这样对他？他不过是个孩子罢了，他——”
His fury was on him. He might have said more, and worse, but Maester Luwin cut in. “Another solution presents itself,” he said, his voice quiet. “Your brother Benjen came to me about Jon a few days ago. It seems the boy aspires to take the black.”
他正在气头上，原本可能会说出更不堪入耳的话，但鲁温学士却适时插话：“我倒有个主意。您的弟弟班扬前几天来找过我，那孩子似乎对加入黑衫军颇有兴趣。”
Ned looked shocked. “He asked to join the Night’s Watch?”
奈德听了大吃一惊：“他想加入守夜人？”
Catelyn said nothing. Let Ned work it out in his own mind; her voice would not be welcome now. Yet gladly would she have kissed the maester just then. His was the perfect solution. Benjen Stark was a Sworn Brother. Jon would be a son to him, the child he would never have. And in time the boy would take the oath as well. He would father no sons who might someday contest with Catelyn’s own grandchildren for Winterfell.
凯特琳没说什么，就让奈德自己理出一番头绪罢，现在她多说只会惹他生气。然而她却高兴得想亲吻眼前这位老师傅呢！他所提出的这个建议正是最完美的解决方案。班扬·史塔克是个发过誓的黑衣弟兄，对他而言，琼恩等于是此生不可能有的儿子。日子久了，那孩子自然而然也会跟着宣誓加入黑衣弟兄，这样一来，他就不能养儿育女，有朝一日来和凯特琳自己的孙子孙女抢夺临冬城的继承权了。
Maester Luwin said, “There is great honor in service on the Wall, my lord.”
鲁温学士又说：“老爷，加入长城守军可是很高的荣誉。”
“And even a bastard may rise high in the Night’s Watch,” Ned reflected. Still, his voice was troubled. “Jon is so young. If he asked this when he was a man grown, that would be one thing, but a boy of fourteen …”
“而且即使是私生子，在守夜人军团里也可能升到高位。”奈德思忖，但他的语气仍然有些困惑，“可琼恩年纪还这么小，倘若他是个成人，说要加入一切还好，然而他只是个十四岁的孩子……。”
“A hard sacrifice,” Maester Luwin agreed. “Yet these are hard times, my lord. His road is no crueler than yours or your lady’s.”
“这确实是个困难的抉择，”鲁温师傅同意，“但我们也身处艰难时刻，他所走的这条路，不会比您或夫人走的路更崎岖坎坷。”
Catelyn thought of the three children she must lose. It was not easy keeping silent then.
凯特琳又无可避免地想起她即将失去的三个孩子，想要保持沉默太难了。
Ned turned away from them to gaze out the window, his long face silent and thoughtful. Finally he sighed, and turned back. “Very well,” he said to Maester Luwin. “I suppose it is for the best. I will speak to Ben.”
奈德转过身去，再次望向窗外，他那长长的脸庞宁静中若有所思。最后他叹口气，又回过头：“好罢，”他对鲁温学士说，“看来这是目前最好的办法了。我会跟班扬谈谈。”
“When shall we tell Jon?” the maester asked.
“我们什么时候告诉琼恩呢？”老师傅问。
“When I must. Preparations must be made. It will be a fortnight before we are ready to depart. I would sooner let Jon enjoy these last few days. Summer will end soon enough, and childhood as well. When the time comes, I will tell him myself.”
“还不是时候，我们要先做些准备，距离启程足足还有两个星期，就让他尽情享受这段剩余的时光吧。夏天很快就要结束，童年的日子所剩无多。时机一到，我会亲自告诉他。”
*ARYA
第八章 艾莉亚
A rya’s stitches were crooked again.
艾莉亚的缝衣针又歪了。
She frowned down at them with dismay and glanced over to where her sister Sansa sat among the other girls. Sansa’s needlework was exquisite. Everyone said so. “Sansa’s work is as pretty as she is,” Septa Mordane told their lady mother once. “She has such fine, delicate hands.” When Lady Catelyn had asked about Arya, the septa had sniffed. “Arya has the hands of a blacksmith.”
她懊恼地皱起眉头，看着手里那团乱七八糟的东西，然后又偷偷瞄了瞄和其他女孩坐在一起的姐姐珊莎。每个人都说珊莎的针线功夫完美无瑕。“珊莎织出来的东西就跟她人一样漂亮。”有次茉丹修女对她们的母亲大人这么说，“她那双手既纤细又灵巧。”当凯特琳夫人问起艾莉亚的表现时，修女哼了一声答道：“艾莉亚的手跟铁匠的手没两样。”
Arya glanced furtively across the room, worried that Septa Mordane might have read her thoughts, but the septa was paying her no attention today. She was sitting with the Princess Myrcella, all smiles and admiration. It was not often that the septa was privileged to instruct a royal princess in the womanly arts, as she had said when the queen brought Myrcella to join them. Arya thought that Myrcella’s stitches looked a little crooked too, but you would never know it from the way Septa Mordane was cooing.
艾莉亚偷偷环视房间四周，担心茉丹修女会读出她的思想。但是修女今天可没把心思放在她身上，她正坐在弥赛菈公主身旁，脸上堆满笑容，口中连声赞美。先前当王后把弥赛菈带来加入她们时，修女就说她平生可没这种福气，可以指导公主针线女红。艾莉亚觉得弥赛菈的针线也有点歪七扭八，但是从茉丹修女的甜言蜜语听起来，旁人绝对想不到。
She studied her own work again, looking for some way to salvage it, then sighed and put down the needle. She looked glumly at her sister. Sansa was chatting away happily as she worked. Beth Cassel, Ser Rodrik’s little girl, was sitting by her feet, listening to every word she said, and Jeyne Poole was leaning over to whisper something in her ear.
她又瞧了瞧自己的活儿，想找出个补救的法子，最后还是叹了口气，把针线搁到一边去了。她沮丧地看看自己的姐姐，珊莎正一边巧手缝纫，一边开心地说闲话。罗德利克爵士的女儿小贝丝·凯索坐在她脚边，认真地聆听她所说的一字一句。这时候，珍妮·普尔刚巧凑在她耳旁不知说了些什么悄悄话。
“What are you talking about?” Arya asked suddenly.
“你们在说什么呀？”艾莉亚突然问。
Jeyne gave her a startled look, then giggled. Sansa looked abashed. Beth blushed. No one answered.
珍妮露出吃惊的表情，随即咯咯笑了起来。珊莎一脸羞赧，贝丝也面红耳赤。没有人答话。
“Tell me,” Arya said.
“跟我说嘛。”艾莉亚说。
Jeyne glanced over to make certain that Septa Mordane was not listening. Myrcella said something then, and the septa laughed along with the rest of the ladies.
珍妮偷瞟了那边一眼，确定茉丹修女没有注意听。恰好弥赛菈说了点话，修女随即和其他仕女一同放声大笑。
“We were talking about the prince,” Sansa said, her voice soft as a kiss.
“我们刚刚在说王子的事。”珊莎说，声音轻得像一个吻。
Arya knew which prince she meant: Joffrey, of course. The tall, handsome one. Sansa got to sit with him at the feast. Arya had to sit with the little fat one. Naturally.
艾莉亚当然知道姐姐指的哪一个王子，除了那个高大英俊的乔佛里还会是谁？先前晚宴的时候珊莎和他坐在一起，艾莉亚则自然而然地得坐在另外那个小胖子旁边了。
“Joffrey likes your sister,” Jeyne whispered, proud as if she had something to do with it. She was the daughter of Winterfell’s steward and Sansa’s dearest friend. “He told her she was very beautiful.”
“乔佛里喜欢你姐姐哟。”珍妮悄声道，语气中带着自豪，仿佛这件事是她一手促成似的。她是临冬城总管的女儿，也是珊莎最要好的朋友。“他跟她说她很漂亮。”
“He’s going to marry her,” little Beth said dreamily, hugging herself. “Then Sansa will be queen of all the realm.”
“有一天他会娶她作新娘子。”小贝丝双手环膝，用一种如梦似幻的语调说，“然后珊莎就会变成全世界的王后啰。”
Sansa had the grace to blush. She blushed prettily. She did everything prettily, Arya thought with dull resentment. “Beth, you shouldn’t make up stories,” Sansa corrected the younger girl, gently stroking her hair to take the harshness out of her words. She looked at Arya. “What did you think of Prince Joff, sister? He’s very gallant, don’t you think?”
珊莎很有礼貌地脸红了。她脸红起来还是很漂亮，她不管做什么都漂漂亮亮，艾莉亚一肚子不满地想。“贝丝，不要这样瞎编故事。”珊莎纠正身旁的小女孩，同时轻轻拨弄她的发丝，好让自己的话听起来不那么严厉。她转向艾莉亚：“好妹妹，你觉得小乔王子怎么样？他实在是个很勇敢的人，你说是不是？”
“Jon says he looks like a girl,” Arya said.
“琼恩说他看起来像个女孩子。”艾莉亚回答。
Sansa sighed as she stitched. “Poor Jon,” she said. “He gets jealous because he’s a bastard.”
珊莎叹了口气，继续手中的针线活。“可怜的琼恩，”她说，“作私生子的难免嫉妒别人。”
“He’s our brother,” Arya said, much too loudly. Her voice cut through the afternoon quiet of the tower room.
“他是我们的哥哥。”艾莉亚回嘴，却说得大声了。她的声音划破了塔顶房间午后的静谧。
Septa Mordane raised her eyes. She had a bony face, sharp eyes, and a thin lipless mouth made for frowning. It was frowning now. “What are you talking about, children?”
茉丹修女抬起眼。她有张细瘦的脸，一双锐利的眼睛，还有一张薄得几乎看不到唇的嘴，这张脸仿佛生来就是用于皱眉生气似的。这下她立刻皱起眉头来了。“孩子们，你们在说些什么呀？”
“Our half brother,” Sansa corrected, soft and precise. She smiled for the septa. “Arya and I were remarking on how pleased we were to have the princess with us today,” she said.
“同父异母的哥哥，”珊莎轻柔而准确地纠正她，同时朝修女露出微笑，“艾莉亚和我刚才正在说：今天能与公主作伴，真是件快乐的事。”
Septa Mordane nodded. “Indeed. A great honor for us all.” Princess Myrcella smiled uncertainly at the compliment. “Arya, why aren’t you at work?” the septa asked. She rose to her feet, starched skirts rustling as she started across the room. “Let me see your stitches.”
茉丹修女点头：“没错，对我们所有人来说都是莫大的荣幸。”弥赛菈公主听到这样的恭维，有点迟疑地笑了笑。“艾莉亚，你怎么不织东西呢？”她问，随即起身走来，浆过的裙子在身后沙沙作响。“让我看看你织出了什么。”
Arya wanted to scream. It was just like Sansa to go and attract the septa’s attention. “Here,” she said, surrendering up her work.
艾莉亚好想扯开嗓子大声尖叫，都是珊莎把修女给引过来的。“喏。”她边说边无奈地交出“成果”。
The septa examined the fabric. “Arya, Arya, Arya,” she said. “This will not do. This will not do at all.”
修女仔细检视着手中的织锦。“艾莉亚、艾莉亚、艾莉亚，”她说：“这样不行啊！你这样完全不行啊！”
Everyone was looking at her. It was too much. Sansa was too well bred to smile at her sister’s disgrace, but Jeyne was smirking on her behalf. Even Princess Myrcella looked sorry for her. Arya felt tears filling her eyes. She pushed herself out of her chair and bolted for the door.
每个人都在看她，这真是太过分了。珊莎很有教养，不会因为自己妹妹出丑而展露嘲笑，但珍妮却在一旁窃笑，连弥赛菈公主也一副怜悯的模样。艾莉亚只觉得眼里充满泪水，她倏地从椅子上站起，往门的方向冲了过去。
Septa Mordane called after her. “Arya, come back here! Don’t you take another step! Your lady mother will hear of this. In front of our royal princess too! You’ll shame us all!”
茉丹修女在她背后叫道：“艾莉亚，你给我回来，你再走一步试试看！我会把这件事告诉你母亲大人。竟然在我们公主面前做出这种事，你可把我们的脸全丢光了！”
Arya stopped at the door and turned back, biting her lip. The tears were running down her cheeks now. She managed a stiff little bow to Myrcella. “By your leave, my lady.”
于是艾莉亚在门边停下脚步，咬着嘴唇转过身，眼泪却已经流下脸颊。她勉强对弥赛微一鞠躬：“公主小姐，请恕我先告退。”
Myrcella blinked at her and looked to her ladies for guidance. But if she was uncertain, Septa Mordane was not. “Just where do you think you are going, Arya?” the septa demanded.
弥赛菈朝她眨了眨眼，转向身旁的仕女们寻求协助。但她虽然犹疑不决，茉丹修女可是斩钉截铁：“艾莉亚，你要上哪儿去呀？”
Arya glared at her. “I have to go shoe a horse,” she said sweetly, taking a brief satisfaction in the shock on the septa’s face. Then she whirled and made her exit, running down the steps as fast as her feet would take her.
艾莉亚瞪着她，“我去帮马儿装蹄铁。”她甜甜地说，并从修女脸上的惊讶表情中得到一丝满足。语毕她旋身离开房间，以最快的速度飞奔下楼。
It wasn’t fair. Sansa had everything. Sansa was two years older; maybe by the time Arya had been born, there had been nothing left. Often it felt that way. Sansa could sew and dance and sing. She wrote poetry. She knew how to dress. She played the high harp and the bells. Worse, she was beautiful. Sansa had gotten their mother’s fine high cheekbones and the thick auburn hair of the Tullys. Arya took after their lord father. Her hair was a lusterless brown, and her face was long and solemn. Jeyne used to call her Arya Horseface, and neigh whenever she came near. It hurt that the one thing Arya could do better than her sister was ride a horse. Well, that and manage a household. Sansa had never had much of a head for figures. If she did marry Prince Joff, Arya hoped for his sake that he had a good steward.
上天真是太不公平，凭什么珊莎就拥有一切？有时候艾莉亚会这么觉得。自己出生的时候，珊莎已经两岁多了，早已没有任何东西剩下来。珊莎精于缝纫刺绣，又能歌善舞，她会吟诗作词，又懂得如何打扮；她奏起竖琴拨弦宛转，摇起钟铃悦耳轻灵。更糟糕的是，她还是大美人一个。珊莎自母亲那儿继承了徒利家族的玲珑颊骨和浓密的枣红秀发，艾莉亚则活像她父亲，发色深褐，黯淡无光；脸形细长，阴霾不开。珍妮老爱叫她“马脸艾莉亚”，每次遇上她就学起马儿嘶叫。想到自己惟一做得比姐姐好的事情就是骑马，她越发难过起来。不过珊莎不擅长管理家务，对数字也向来一窍不通，倘若哪天她真嫁给乔佛里王子，艾莉亚希望他最好有个好管家，否则后果不堪设想。
Nymeria was waiting for her in the guardroom at the base of the stairs. She bounded to her feet as soon as she caught sight of Arya. Arya grinned. The wolf pup loved her, even if no one else did. They went everywhere together, and Nymeria slept in her room, at the foot of her bed. If Mother had not forbidden it, Arya would gladly have taken the wolf with her to needlework. Let Septa Mordane complain about her stitches then .
娜梅莉亚一直在楼梯底部的守卫室里等着她。一见艾莉亚的身影，她立刻跳将起来，艾莉亚开心地笑了，就算全世界没人爱她，最起码还有这只小狼。她们上哪儿都形影不离，娜梅莉亚晚上就睡在她房间，蜷缩在床脚下。若非母亲不准，她原本想把小狼一起带去针线室。到时候看看茉丹修女还敢不敢批评她的活儿。
Nymeria nipped eagerly at her hand as Arya untied her. She had yellow eyes. When they caught the sunlight, they gleamed like two golden coins. Arya had named her after the warrior queen of the Rhoyne, who had led her people across the narrow sea. That had been a great scandal too. Sansa, of course, had named her pup “Lady.” Arya made a face and hugged the wolfling tight. Nymeria licked her ear, and she giggled.
艾莉亚为她松绑，娜梅莉亚则热切地舔着她的手，她有双黄色的眼珠子，阳光一照，亮得就像两枚金币。艾莉亚用传说中率领子民横渡狭海的战士女王的名讳为小狼命名，自然也引起了不小的骚动。珊莎呢，不消说，把她的小狼叫做“淑女”。想到这儿，艾莉亚扮了个鬼脸，紧紧地抱着小狼。娜梅莉亚舔了舔她耳根，痒得她咯咯直笑。
By now Septa Mordane would certainly have sent word to her lady mother. If she went to her room, they would find her. Arya did not care to be found. She had a better notion. The boys were at practice in the yard. She wanted to see Robb put gallant Prince Joffrey flat on his back. “Come,” she whispered to Nymeria. She got up and ran, the wolf coming hard at her heels.
茉丹修女这时一定已经派人通知她母亲大人了，所以她若是直接回房，一定会被逮个正着。艾莉亚可不想被逮着，她心里有个更好的点子。现在刚好是男孩子们在校场上练习比试的时间，她想看看罗柏亲手把勇敢的乔佛里王子打成鼻青脸肿的模样。“来罢。”她朝娜梅莉亚低语，随即起身迈步飞奔，小狼紧跟在后。
There was a window in the covered bridge between the armory and the Great Keep where you had a view of the whole yard. That was where they headed.
连接主堡和武器库的密闭桥梁上，有扇窗子可以将整个校场尽收眼底，她要去的就是那地方。
They arrived, flushed and breathless, to find Jon seated on the sill, one leg drawn up languidly to his chin. He was watching the action, so absorbed that he seemed unaware of her approach until his white wolf moved to meet them. Nymeria stalked closer on wary feet. Ghost, already larger than his litter mates, smelled her, gave her ear a careful nip, and settled back down.
等她气喘吁吁地跑到目的地，却发现琼恩已经靠坐在窗棂上，一只脚无精打采地翘起顶着下巴。他聚精会神地注意着下方的打斗，直等到他自己的白狼站起来朝她们迎去方才回过神来。娜梅莉亚小心翼翼地靠了过去，白灵已经长得比其他几只狼都要高大，它嗅了嗅她，轻轻地咬了一下她的耳朵，然后返身趴下。
Jon gave her a curious look. “Shouldn’t you be working on your stitches, little sister?”
琼恩狐疑地看着她：“小妹，你这会儿不是该上缝纫课么？”
Arya made a face at him. “I wanted to see them fight.”
艾莉亚朝他扮个鬼脸。“我想看他们打架。”
He smiled. “Come here, then.”
他笑道：“那就快过来吧。”
Arya climbed up on the window and sat beside him, to a chorus of thuds and grunts from the yard below.
艾莉亚爬上窗台，在他身边坐下，下面校场上的铿锵响声顿时传入耳中。
To her disappointment, it was the younger boys drilling. Bran was so heavily padded he looked as though he had belted on a featherbed, and Prince Tommen, who was plump to begin with, seemed positively round. They were huffing and puffing and hitting at each other with padded wooden swords under the watchful eye of old Ser Rodrik Cassel, the master-at-arms, a great stout keg of a man with magnificent white cheek whiskers. A dozen spectators, man and boy, were calling out encouragement, Robb’s voice the loudest among them. She spotted Theon Greyjoy beside him, his black doublet emblazoned with the golden kraken of his House, a look of wry contempt on his face. Both of the combatants were staggering. Arya judged that they had been at it awhile.
可令她大失所望的是，在场子上比划的只有年纪比较小的几个男孩子。布兰全身上下穿着护具，看起来活像被绑在一张羽毛床上。而托曼王子本来就胖，这一模样更是浑圆无比。他们正在老罗德利克爵士的监视下，挥舞木制钝剑相互攻击。老爵士是城里的教头，身材高大魁梧，有一把气派非凡的雪白胡须。十几个在旁围观的人正为两个小男孩加油打气，里面喊声最大的就是罗柏。艾莉亚看到席恩·葛雷乔伊站在罗柏旁边，穿着黑色紧身上衣，上面绣有他的金色海怪家徽，脸上则挂着一抹嘲讽的轻蔑。两个比武的男孩子脚步都不太稳，艾莉亚推测他们可能已经打上好一阵子了。
“A shade more exhausting than needlework,” Jon observed.
“看到没有，这恐怕比做针线活儿要累哟。”琼恩表示。
“A shade more fun than needlework,” Arya gave back at him. Jon grinned, reached over, and messed up her hair. Arya flushed. They had always been close. Jon had their father’s face, as she did. They were the only ones. Robb and Sansa and Bran and even little Rickon all took after the Tullys, with easy smiles and fire in their hair. When Arya had been little, she had been afraid that meant that she was a bastard too. It had been Jon she had gone to in her fear, and Jon who had reassured her.
“可也比做针线活儿要好玩多了。”艾莉亚回嘴。琼恩咧嘴一笑，伸手过来拨弄她的头发。艾莉亚脸红了，他们一向很亲，在所有的孩子里，就数琼恩和她遗传到父亲的长脸。罗柏、珊莎和布兰都长得比较像徒利家的人，就连小瑞肯也是笑容可掬，发红似火。艾莉亚小时候，还曾经害怕自己也是个私生子。她害怕的时候就去找琼恩，因为琼恩总能让她安心。
“Why aren’t you down in the yard?” Arya asked him.
“你怎么没跟他们一起下场子？”艾莉亚问他。
He gave her a half smile. “Bastards are not allowed to damage young princes,” he said. “Any bruises they take in the practice yard must come from trueborn swords.”
他浅浅一笑：“私生子没资格跟王子过招，”他说，“就算练习，也只有正室的孩子可以伤他们。”
“Oh.” Arya felt abashed. She should have realized. For the second time today, Arya reflected that life was not fair.
“噢。”艾莉亚觉得好生尴尬，她早该想到这点才对。在同一天里，她第二次感叹生命的不公平。
She watched her little brother whack at Tommen. “I could do just as good as Bran,” she said. “He’s only seven. I’m nine.”
她看着自己的小弟挥剑朝托曼砍去。“我打起来不输布兰，”她说，“他才七岁，我已经九岁了。”
Jon looked her over with all his fourteen-year-old wisdom. “You’re too skinny,” he said. He took her arm to feel her muscle. Then he sighed and shook his head. “I doubt you could even lift a longsword, little sister, never mind swing one.”
琼恩以一副小大人的姿态打量着她：“你太瘦啦，”他挽起她的手，量度她的肌肉发育，然后摇头叹气，“小妹，我看你连把长剑都举不起，更别说是挥舞格斗了。”
Arya snatched back her arm and glared at him. Jon messed up her hair again. They watched Bran and Tommen circle each other.
艾莉亚抽回手，很不服气地瞪着他看。于是琼恩又伸手拨弄她的一头乱发。两人静静地坐在一起，看着布兰和托曼互相兜圈子。
“You see Prince Joffrey?” Jon asked.
“你看到乔佛里王子了吗？”琼恩问。
She hadn’t, not at first glance, but when she looked again she found him to the back, under the shade of the high stone wall. He was surrounded by men she did not recognize, young squires in the livery of Lannister and Baratheon, strangers all. There were a few older men among them; knights, she surmised.
她原本没有看到，但仔细一瞧，便发现他站在广场后方高大石墙的阴影里，身旁围绕着她不认识的人，他们穿着兰尼斯特家和拜拉席恩家的制服，大概都是年轻侍从吧。人群里还有几个年长的，她猜多半是成年骑士。
“Look at the arms on his surcoat,” Jon suggested.
“你瞧瞧他外套上的家徽。”琼恩提出。
Arya looked. An ornate shield had been embroidered on the prince’s padded surcoat. No doubt the needlework was exquisite. The arms were divided down the middle; on one side was the crowned stag of the royal House, on the other the lion of Lannister.
艾莉亚一看，只见王子外衣上绣了一面华丽无比的盾牌，毫无疑问是极为精巧的手工。这盾牌被分为左右两半，一边是代表王室的宝冠雄鹿，另一边则是兰尼斯特家族的怒吼雄狮。
“The Lannisters are proud,” Jon observed. “You’d think the royal sigil would be sufficient, but no. He makes his mother’s House equal in honor to the king’s.”
“兰尼斯特是个骄傲的家族，”琼恩说，“本来他衣服绣上王族的家徽就够了，但是他却把母亲那边的家徽也绣了上去，而且还和王室的纹章平起平坐。”
“The woman is important too!” Arya protested.
“女人也很重要呀！”艾莉亚不禁反驳。
Jon chuckled. “Perhaps you should do the same thing, little sister. Wed Tully to Stark in your arms.”
琼恩呵呵笑道：“小妹呀，那么你也应该有样学样，把针线活学好，然后将徒利和史塔克两家的徽章都绣在衣服上。”
“A wolf with a fish in its mouth?” It made her laugh. “That would look silly. Besides, if a girl can’t fight, why should she have a coat of arms?”
“绣一匹嘴里叼鱼的狼么？”她想想就觉得好笑，“那样看起来好蠢。更何况，又不准女孩子上战场打仗，那她要家徽做什么用？”
Jon shrugged. “Girls get the arms but not the swords. Bastards get the swords but not the arms. I did not make the rules, little sister.”
琼恩耸耸肩：“女孩子有家徽却不能拿剑作战，私生子能拿剑却没家徽可绣。小妹，世上的规矩不是我订的，我也无能为力呀。”
There was a shout from the courtyard below. Prince Tommen was rolling in the dust, trying to get up and failing. All the padding made him look like a turtle on its back. Bran was standing over him with upraised wooden sword, ready to whack him again once he regained his feet. The men began to laugh.
下方广场传来一声大喊，只见托曼王子倒在翻飞尘土里打滚，想站起来却力不从心，外加绑的那堆皮垫护甲，使他整个人看起来就像只翻过身的乌龟似地在那儿挣扎。布兰正高举木剑，站在他旁边，准备等他一站起来就立刻补上一剑。
“Enough!” Ser Rodrik called out. He gave the prince a hand and yanked him back to his feet. “Well fought. Lew, Donnis, help them out of their armor.” He looked around. “Prince Joffrey, Robb, will you go another round?”
“住手！”罗德利克爵士吼道，他拉了托曼一把，协助他站起来。“打得很好。路易、唐尼斯，帮他们把护甲脱掉。”他环顾四周，“乔佛里王子，罗柏，你们要不要再来一场？”
Robb, already sweaty from a previous bout, moved forward eagerly. “Gladly.”
罗柏身上虽然还流淌着前一场比试的汗水，却迫不及待地踏步向前：“乐意之至。”
Joffrey moved into the sunlight in response to Rodrik’s summons. His hair shone like spun gold. He looked bored. “This is a game for children, Ser Rodrik.”
乔佛里听到罗德利克爵士的传唤，这会儿也从先前所在的阴影里走进阳光下。他的头发在太阳照射下亮如金箔，但脸上却挂着一副百无聊赖的神色。“罗德利克爵士，这都是小孩子把戏。”
Theon Greyjoy gave a sudden bark of laughter. “You are children,” he said derisively.
席恩·葛雷乔伊不禁放声笑道：“你们俩是小孩子没错呀。”
“Robb may be a child,” Joffrey said. “I am a prince. And I grow tired of swatting at Starks with a play sword.”
“罗柏是不是小孩子我不知道，”乔佛里说，“但我可是堂堂王太子，我不想再跟姓史塔克的家伙拿木头玩具挥来挥去了。”
“You got more swats than you gave, Joff,” Robb said. “Are you afraid?”
“小乔，你中剑的次数可比你挥的次数要多。”罗柏道，“你怕了么？”
Prince Joffrey looked at him. “Oh, terrified,” he said. “You’re so much older.” Some of the Lannister men laughed.
乔佛里面无表情地看着他。“噢哟，好恐怖。”他说：“咱们的老战士发话哩。”兰尼斯特家的侍从闻言便笑。
Jon looked down on the scene with a frown. “Joffrey is truly a little shit,” he told Arya.
琼恩皱眉看着场子上发生的事。“乔佛里实在是个不折不扣的浑球。”他告诉艾莉亚。
Ser Rodrik tugged thoughtfully at his white whiskers. “What are you suggesting?” he asked the prince.
罗德利克爵士若有所思地捻捻那撮白胡子，“那请问您有什么想法？”他询问王子。
“Live steel.”
“我要真刀真枪地打。”
“Done,” Robb shot back. “You’ll be sorry!”
“没问题，”罗柏立刻吼回去，“你会后悔的！”
The master-at-arms put a hand on Robb’s shoulder to quiet him. “Live steel is too dangerous. I will permit you tourney swords, with blunted edges.”
教头伸手按住罗柏的肩膀，要他冷静。“用真剑太危险，我只准你们用比武时的钝剑。”
Joffrey said nothing, but a man strange to Arya, a tall knight with black hair and burn scars on his face, pushed forward in front of the prince. “This is your prince. Who are you to tell him he may not have an edge on his sword, ser?”
乔佛里没答腔，却有一个身躯高大，半边脸有着明显灼烧痕迹的黑发男子推开旁边的人，挡在王子面前：“爵士先生，这可是你的王太子，你算什么，有何资格要他不准用这不准用那？”
“Master-at-arms of Winterfell, Clegane, and you would do well not to forget it.”
“克里冈，我算临冬城的教头，你最好牢牢记住。”
“Are you training women here?” the burned man wanted to know. He was muscled like a bull.
“你们这儿是专门训练女人的吗？”带烧伤的高个子问，他浑身肌肉，壮得像头牛。
“I am training knights,” Ser Rodrik said pointedly. “They will have steel when they are ready. When they are of an age.”
“我训练的是骑士，”罗德利克爵士口气锐利地说，“等他们长大成人，技巧足够纯熟，我自会让他们使用真正的武器。”
The burned man looked at Robb. “How old are you, boy?”
带烧伤的男子转头问罗柏：“小子，你几岁？”
“Fourteen,” Robb said.
“十四岁。”罗柏应道。
“I killed a man at twelve. You can be sure it was not with a blunt sword.”
“我十二岁就杀过人，告诉你，我用的可不是钝剑。”
Arya could see Robb bristle. His pride was wounded. He turned on Ser Rodrik. “Let me do it. I can beat him.”
艾莉亚看得出罗柏的自尊心已然受创，正火冒三丈，快要按捺不住怒气。他对罗德利克爵士说：“让我用真剑罢，我可以打败他。”
“Beat him with a tourney blade, then,” Ser Rodrik said.
“不，用钝剑打。”罗德利克爵士回答。
Joffrey shrugged. “Come and see me when you’re older, Stark. If you’re not too old.” There was laughter from the Lannister men.
乔佛里耸耸肩：“史塔克，我看你就等长大之后再来跟我较量好了，不过也别等到走不动了才来喔。”兰尼斯特的人又是一阵哄笑。
Robb’s curses rang through the yard. Arya covered her mouth in shock. Theon Greyjoy seized Robb’s arm to keep him away from the prince. Ser Rodrik tugged at his whiskers in dismay.
罗柏的咒骂响彻整个校场。艾莉亚吃惊地捂住嘴巴。席恩·葛雷乔伊捉住罗柏的手，没让他朝王子冲去，罗德利克爵士则忧心忡忡地捻着胡子。
Joffrey feigned a yawn and turned to his younger brother. “Come, Tommen,” he said. “The hour of play is done. Leave the children to their frolics.”
乔佛里装模作样地打个呵欠，然后转身对他弟弟说：“走罢，托曼，游戏时间结束了。让孩子们留下来继续玩吧。”
That brought more laughter from the Lannisters, more curses from Robb. Ser Rodrik’s face was beet-red with fury under the white of his whiskers. Theon kept Robb locked in an iron grip until the princes and their party were safely away.
此话一出，兰尼斯特的部属们笑得更开心，罗柏也骂得更大声。罗德利克爵士气得满脸通红，席恩则是紧紧地抱住罗柏，直到王子一行离去之后才肯松手。
Jon watched them leave, and Arya watched Jon. His face had grown as still as the pool at the heart of the godswood. Finally he climbed down off the window. “The show is done,” he said. He bent to scratch Ghost behind the ears. The white wolf rose and rubbed against him. “You had best run back to your room, little sister. Septa Mordane will surely be lurking. The longer you hide, the sterner the penance. You’ll be sewing all through winter. When the spring thaw comes, they will find your body with a needle still locked tight between your frozen fingers.”
琼恩目送他们离去，艾莉亚则看着琼恩，他的脸沉静得有如神木林中那泓冷泉。最后他爬下窗台：“好戏结束了。”他弯下身子搔搔白灵的耳后根，小狼也站起身，向他靠过去撒娇。“小妹，你最好还是快回房去。茉丹修女一定正等着修理你，你躲得越久，到时候处罚就越重，弄不好她会叫你织一整个冬天的东西，等到春天冰雪融化，我们就会发现你冰冷的尸体，而缝衣针还牢牢地握在结冰的手里哟。”
Arya didn’t think it was funny. “I hate needlework!” she said with passion. “It’s not fair!”
艾莉亚听了完全笑不出来。“我最讨厌女红！”她激动地说，“真不公平！”
“Nothing is fair,” Jon said. He messed up her hair again and walked away from her, Ghost moving silently beside him. Nymeria started to follow too, then stopped and came back when she saw that Arya was not coming.
“这世上没有公平这回事，”琼恩应道，他又拨拨她的乱发，起身走了，白灵安静地跟在他后面。娜梅莉亚正准备跟去，走了几步回头才发现主人没跟来。
Reluctantly she turned in the other direction.
于是她只好很不情愿地朝反方向去。
It was worse than Jon had thought. It wasn’t Septa Mordane waiting in her room. It was Septa Mordane and her mother.
事情比琼恩料想的还惨，因为等在她房里的可不只是茉丹修女，而是茉丹修女和母亲两个人。
*BRAN
第九章 布兰
T he hunt left at dawn. The king wanted wild boar at the feast tonight. Prince Joffrey rode with his father, so Robb had been allowed to join the hunters as well. Uncle Benjen, Jory, Theon Greyjoy, Ser Rodrik, and even the queen’s funny little brother had all ridden out with them. It was the last hunt, after all. On the morrow they left for the south.
打猎的队伍于黎明启程，国王希望能为今天的晚宴多添一道野熊大餐。因为乔佛里王子与国王同行，所以罗柏也得到允许，跟着狩猎队伍一同前往。班扬叔叔、乔里、席恩·葛雷乔伊和罗德利克爵士他们都跟着一道去，就连王后的滑稽小弟也在队伍中。毕竟这是他们在北方最后的打猎机会，明天，国王的队伍就要动身南下。
Bran had been left behind with Jon and the girls and Rickon. But Rickon was only a baby and the girls were only girls and Jon and his wolf were nowhere to be found. Bran did not look for him very hard. He thought Jon was angry at him. Jon seemed to be angry at everyone these days. Bran did not know why. He was going with Uncle Ben to the Wall, to join the Night’s Watch. That was almost as good as going south with the king. Robb was the one they were leaving behind, not Jon.
布兰和琼恩、姐姐们以及瑞肯留在城里。瑞肯只是个小娃娃，女孩子们本来就不喜欢打猎，而琼恩和他的小狼则跑得不见踪影。布兰也没有努力去找他，因为他觉得琼恩似乎在生自己的气。琼恩这几天似乎在生城里每一个人的气，布兰很纳闷，他要和班扬叔叔到长城去加入守夜人军团，那可不是和跟国王南下一样的好事吗？要留在家里的人是罗柏，不是琼恩呀。
For days, Bran could scarcely wait to be off. He was going to ride the kingsroad on a horse of his own, not a pony but a real horse. His father would be the Hand of the King, and they were going to live in the red castle at King’s Landing, the castle the Dragonlords had built. Old Nan said there were ghosts there, and dungeons where terrible things had been done, and dragon heads on the walls. It gave Bran a shiver just to think of it, but he was not afraid. How could he be afraid? His father would be with him, and the king with all his knights and sworn swords.
这几天来，布兰兴奋得坐立不安。他很快就要在国王大道上策马驰骋了，不是骑小马喔，而是骑真正的骏马。父亲将成为国王的首相，他们会搬进君临，住进龙王建造的“红堡”。老奶妈说那里闹鬼，地牢里有不为人知的恐怖酷刑，墙上还挂着龙头。布兰光想想就浑身打颤，但他却不害怕，有什么好怕的呢？他有父亲保护，还有国王和他所有的骑士与宣誓效忠的武士呢。
Bran was going to be a knight himself someday, one of the Kingsguard. Old Nan said they were the finest swords in all the realm. There were only seven of them, and they wore white armor and had no wives or children, but lived only to serve the king. Bran knew all the stories. Their names were like music to him. Serwyn of the Mirror Shield. Ser Ryam Redwyne. Prince Aemon the Dragonknight. The twins Ser Erryk and Ser Arryk, who had died on one another’s swords hundreds of years ago, when brother fought sister in the war the singers called the Dance of the Dragons. The White Bull, Gerold Hightower. Ser Arthur Dayne, the Sword of the Morning. Barristan the Bold.
有朝一日布兰自己也要当骑士，加入国王的御林铁卫。老奶妈说他们是全国最优秀的战士。御林铁卫一共只有七人，身穿白衣白甲，没有任何家室牵累，活着的惟一目的就是守护国王。关于他们的故事布兰早就听得滚瓜烂熟，倒背如流了：“镜盾”萨文，莱安·雷德温爵士，龙骑士伊蒙王子，几百年前死在对方剑下的孪生兄弟伊利克爵士和亚历克爵士——那是一场骨肉相残，姐弟交战，被后世吟游诗人称为“血龙狂舞”的战争，还有“白牛”杰洛·海陶尔，“拂晓神剑”亚瑟·戴恩爵士，以及“无畏的”巴利斯坦。
Two of the Kingsguard had come north with King Robert. Bran had watched them with fascination, never quite daring to speak to them. Ser Boros was a bald man with a jowly face, and Ser Meryn had droopy eyes and a beard the color of rust. Ser Jaime Lannister looked more like the knights in the stories, and he was of the Kingsguard too, but Robb said he had killed the old mad king and shouldn’t count anymore. The greatest living knight was Ser Barristan Selmy, Barristan the Bold, the Lord Commander of the Kingsguard. Father had promised that they would meet Ser Barristan when they reached King’s Landing, and Bran had been marking the days on his wall, eager to depart, to see a world he had only dreamed of and begin a life he could scarcely imagine.
这次有两名御林铁卫和劳勃国王一同北来，布兰瞠目结舌地看着他们，始终不敢上前攀谈。柏洛斯爵士是个秃了顶、双下巴的人，马林爵士则两眼低垂，须如铁锈。只有詹姆·兰尼斯特爵士看起来比较像故事里的伟大骑士，他也是七铁卫之一，不过罗柏说他杀了疯狂的老王，已经不能算御林铁卫了。如今世上最伟大的骑士是巴利斯坦·赛尔弥爵士，人称“无畏的”巴利斯坦，他是御林铁卫队长。父亲答应过他们，等抵达君临之后，一定会让他们见见巴利斯坦爵士。布兰每天在墙上画记号数日子，迫不及待想动身出发，去看看一个以往只存在于梦中的世界，过另一种从来无法想像的生活。
Yet now that the last day was at hand, suddenly Bran felt lost. Winterfell had been the only home he had ever known. His father had told him that he ought to say his farewells today, and he had tried. After the hunt had ridden out, he wandered through the castle with his wolf at his side, intending to visit the ones who would be left behind, Old Nan and Gage the cook, Mikken in his smithy, Hodor the stableboy who smiled so much and took care of his pony and never said anything but “Hodor,” the man in the glass gardens who gave him a blackberry when he came to visit …
可现在离出发只剩一天，布兰却突然若有所失起来。临冬城是他惟一熟悉的家园，父亲叮嘱他今天要向大家道别，他也尽力去试。打猎队伍离开后，他带着小狼在城堡里闲逛，打算和熟人们一个个说再见。老奶妈、厨师盖吉，铁匠密肯，还有负责帮他照顾小马，成天咧着嘴笑，除了“阿多”两个字以外，一句话也不会讲的马夫阿多。每次布兰去玻璃花园玩，阿多总会给他一颗黑莓。
But it was no good. He had gone to the stable first, and seen his pony there in its stall, except it wasn’t his pony anymore, he was getting a real horse and leaving the pony behind, and all of a sudden Bran just wanted to sit down and cry. He turned and ran off before Hodor and the other stableboys could see the tears in his eyes. That was the end of his farewells. Instead Bran spent the morning alone in the godswood, trying to teach his wolf to fetch a stick, and failing. The wolfling was smarter than any of the hounds in his father’s kennel and Bran would have sworn he understood every word that was said to him, but he showed very little interest in chasing sticks.
但他开不了口。他先去了马厩，看到自己的小马，只是现在已经不属于他了。他很快便会拥有一匹真正的马，而把小马留在这里，突然间布兰好想坐下来放声大哭，于是他赶紧跑开，以免阿多和其他马夫见到他眼中的泪水。他总共就说了这么一次再见，之后便一早上独自躲在神木林里，教他的小狼把丢出去的树枝叼回来，却徒劳无功。他的小狼比父亲兽舍里所有的猎狗都要聪明，他几乎可以肯定他听得懂他说的每一句话。只可惜他对叼树枝似乎没多少兴趣。
He was still trying to decide on a name. Robb was calling his Grey Wind, because he ran so fast. Sansa had named hers Lady, and Arya named hers after some old witch queen in the songs, and little Rickon called his Shaggydog, which Bran thought was a pretty stupid name for a direwolf. Jon’s wolf, the white one, was Ghost. Bran wished he had thought of that first, even though his wolf wasn’t white. He had tried a hundred names in the last fortnight, but none of them sounded right.
他到现在还无法决定给它取什么名字。罗柏的狼叫做“灰风”，因为它跑起来迅捷如风；珊莎的叫做“淑女”；艾莉亚用歌谣里某个古老的女巫王为她的狼命名；小瑞肯则把他的狼叫做“毛毛狗”——布兰觉得给冰原狼起这种名字实在很蠢；琼恩的那只白狼叫白灵。布兰真希望自己比琼恩先想到这个名字，即使他的狼毛色不是很白。过去这两周以来，他不知道已经想过多少名字了，偏偏就是没一个听来顺耳。
Finally he got tired of the stick game and decided to go climbing. He hadn’t been up to the broken tower for weeks with everything that had happened, and this might be his last chance.
最后他累了，便决定去爬墙。最近发生了这么多事情，他已经好几个星期没爬到残塔上玩了，这说不定还是他最后的机会呢。
He raced across the godswood, taking the long way around to avoid the pool where the heart tree grew. The heart tree had always frightened him; trees ought not have eyes, Bran thought, or leaves that looked like hands. His wolf came sprinting at his heels. “You stay here,” he told him at the base of the sentinel tree near the armory wall. “Lie down. That’s right. Now stay.”
于是他拔腿跑过神木林，还特地绕路避开心树旁边的那泓冷泉。布兰一直很怕心树，他总觉得树不应该长眼睛，叶子也不该生成手掌的模样。小狼跟在他身边。“你留在这儿。”他在武器库墙外哨兵树下对它说，“乖乖躺下，对，就这样，留在这儿别动——”
The wolf did as he was told. Bran scratched him behind the ears, then turned away, jumped, grabbed a low branch, and pulled himself up. He was halfway up the tree, moving easily from limb to limb, when the wolf got to his feet and began to howl.
小狼果然乖乖地留在原地，布兰搔了搔它的耳后根，然后转身一跃，抓住低垂的枝干，一翻身便上了树。可当他爬到一半，正游刃有余地穿梭枝丫时，小狼却霍地起身嗥叫开来。
Bran looked back down. His wolf fell silent, staring up at him through slitted yellow eyes. A strange chill went through him. He began to climb again. Once more the wolf howled. “Quiet,” he yelled. “Sit down. Stay. You’re worse than Mother.” The howling chased him all the way up the tree, until finally he jumped off onto the armory roof and out of sight.
布兰低头一看，小狼便立刻安静，睁大那双亮闪闪的黄色眼珠往上瞧。布兰觉得有股诡异的寒意流贯全身。他继续爬，小狼又继续嗥。“别叫啦！”他喊，“乖乖坐好别动，你比妈还烦。”然而狼嗥却一直跟随着他，直到他跳上武器库屋顶，消失了踪影为止。
The rooftops of Winterfell were Bran’s second home. His mother often said that Bran could climb before he could walk. Bran could not remember when he first learned to walk, but he could not remember when he started to climb either, so he supposed it must be true.
临冬城的屋顶几乎可算是布兰的第二个家，母亲总说他连走路都还没学会，就先学会爬墙啦。布兰既不记得自己什么时候学会走路，也不知道自己什么时候学会爬墙，所以他猜她说得应该没错。
To a boy, Winterfell was a grey stone labyrinth of walls and towers and courtyards and tunnels spreading out in all directions. In the older parts of the castle, the halls slanted up and down so that you couldn’t even be sure what floor you were on. The place had grown over the centuries like some monstrous stone tree, Maester Luwin told him once, and its branches were gnarled and thick and twisted, its roots sunk deep into the earth.
对一个小男孩而言，临冬城的城墙高塔、庭院甬道就像是座灰石砌成的广袤迷宫。在城堡比较老旧的部分，无数厅堂四处倾斜，容易让人产生不知置身何处之感。鲁温学士曾说，几千年来，城堡就像一棵不断蔓生的怪物般的石头巨树，枝干扭曲，盘根错节。
When he got out from under it and scrambled up near the sky, Bran could see all of Winterfell in a glance. He liked the way it looked, spread out beneath him, only birds wheeling over his head while all the life of the castle went on below. Bran could perch for hours among the shapeless, rain-worn gargoyles that brooded over the First Keep, watching it all: the men drilling with wood and steel in the yard, the cooks tending their vegetables in the glass garden, restless dogs running back and forth in the kennels, the silence of the godswood, the girls gossiping beside the washing well. It made him feel like he was lord of the castle, in a way even Robb would never know.
当布兰穿过错综复杂的倾颓古城，爬到接近天空的地方，全城的景致终于一览无遗。他很喜欢临冬城在他面前展开的辽阔样貌，城堡里的一切熙来攘往、人声喧哗都在他脚下，惟有天际飞鸟在头上盘旋。布兰往往就这样趴在首堡之上，置身在形状早已不复辨识、被风霜雨雪摧残殆尽的石像鬼间，俯瞰下方的城间百态。看着广场上拖运木材和钢铁的长工，看着玻璃花园里采集菜蔬的厨师，看着犬舍里来回奔跑、局促不安的猎狗，看着静默无语的神木林，看着深井边交头接耳的女侍，仿佛他才是城堡真正的主人，即使罗柏也无法体会这种境界。
It taught him Winterfell’s secrets too. The builders had not even leveled the earth; there were hills and valleys behind the walls of Winterfell. There was a covered bridge that went from the fourth floor of the bell tower across to the second floor of the rookery. Bran knew about that. And he knew you could get inside the inner wall by the south gate, climb three floors and run all the way around Winterfell through a narrow tunnel in the stone, and then come out on ground level at the north gate, with a hundred feet of wall looming over you. Even Maester Luwin didn’t know that , Bran was convinced.
他也因此挖掘出临冬城许多不为人知的秘密，比如当初建筑工人并没有把城堡附近的地势铲平，所以城墙外面不但有起伏丘陵，还有溪涧峡谷。布兰知道一座密闭的桥道，可以从钟塔的四楼直接通鸦巢的二层。他还知道如何从南门进入内城墙里边，顺着门梯爬三层，便能找到一条狭窄的石砌甬道，它可以绕行临冬城，最后抵达位于百尺高墙阴影下的北门底层。布兰相信就连鲁温师傅也不知道这条捷径。
His mother was terrified that one day Bran would slip off a wall and kill himself. He told her that he wouldn’t, but she never believed him. Once she made him promise that he would stay on the ground. He had managed to keep that promise for almost a fortnight, miserable every day, until one night he had gone out the window of his bedroom when his brothers were fast asleep.
母亲一直很害怕布兰哪天会不小心滑下来，失足摔死。任他再三保证，她却怎么也不肯相信。有次她强迫他发誓不再往高处爬，结果这个诺言只勉强维持了两个星期，他每天都痛苦无比，最后有一天夜里，趁他兄弟熟睡的时候，他还是爬出了卧房窗户。
He confessed his crime the next day in a fit of guilt. Lord Eddard ordered him to the godswood to cleanse himself. Guards were posted to see that Bran remained there alone all night to reflect on his disobedience. The next morning Bran was nowhere to be seen. They finally found him fast asleep in the upper branches of the tallest sentinel in the grove.
翌日他满怀罪恶感地自行招认，艾德公爵叫他独自去神木林忏悔，还派了守卫监视，以确保他整晚都在林子里反省他不听话的行为。没想到第二天清晨，布兰却不见踪影，最后众人是在林间最高的一棵哨兵树的上层枝干找到睡得正香甜的他。
As angry as he was, his father could not help but laugh. “You’re not my son,” he told Bran when they fetched him down, “you’re a squirrel. So be it. If you must climb, then climb, but try not to let your mother see you.”
尽管父亲气得半死，终于还是忍不住笑道：“你一定不是我儿子，”当其他人把布兰抱下来时，他对儿子说，“你根本是只松鼠。算了，我认了，如果你真的非爬不可，那就去爬吧，尽量别让你母亲瞧见就是。”
Bran did his best, although he did not think he ever really fooled her. Since his father would not forbid it, she turned to others. Old Nan told him a story about a bad little boy who climbed too high and was struck down by lightning, and how afterward the crows came to peck out his eyes. Bran was not impressed. There were crows’ nests atop the broken tower, where no one ever went but him, and sometimes he filled his pockets with corn before he climbed up there and the crows ate it right out of his hand. None of them had ever shown the slightest bit of interest in pecking out his eyes.
布兰很努力，虽然他认为母亲对他的举动其实一清二楚。既然父亲不愿阻止他四处攀爬，她便转而采取迂回策略。首先来的是老奶妈，她跟他讲了一个故事，说从前有个不听话的坏小孩，越爬越高，最后被雷活活劈死，死后乌鸦还来啄他眼睛。布兰听了不为所动，因为残塔上多的是乌鸦窠巢，那里除了他没人会去，所以有时他会在口袋里装满玉米。一上塔顶，乌鸦便都开开心心地聚拢来从他手心啄食，怎么也不像会啄他眼睛的模样。
Later, Maester Luwin built a little pottery boy and dressed him in Bran’s clothes and flung him off the wall into the yard below, to demonstrate what would happen to Bran if he fell. That had been fun, but afterward Bran just looked at the maester and said, “I’m not made of clay. And anyhow, I never fall.”
眼看这招无效，鲁温师傅便用陶土捏了个小男孩，为它穿上布兰的衣服，然后从城墙上丢下去，好让布兰了解他若是摔下，会有多么凄惨的结果。那是个有趣的实验，但事后布兰却只盯着鲁温师傅，面无表情地说：“我不是泥做的，而且我绝对不会摔下去。”
Then for a while the guards would chase him whenever they saw him on the roofs, and try to haul him down. That was the best time of all. It was like playing a game with his brothers, except that Bran always won. None of the guards could climb half so well as Bran, not even Jory. Most of the time they never saw him anyway. People never looked up. That was another thing he liked about climbing; it was almost like being invisible.
在此之后，轮到了城里的守卫，有一段时间，只要他们发现他在屋顶上，就会吆喝追赶，想把他赶下来。那是最紧张刺激的时刻了，简直就像和哥哥弟弟们玩游戏，只不过，这游戏每次都是布兰获胜。卫兵们谁也没有布兰这种本事，连乔里也拿他没辙。不过多数时候他们根本就没看见他，人是从来不往上看的。这也是他喜欢爬墙的原因之一，仿佛可以因此隐身遁形。
He liked how it felt too, pulling himself up a wall stone by stone, fingers and toes digging hard into the small crevices between. He always took off his boots and went barefoot when he climbed; it made him feel as if he had four hands instead of two. He liked the deep, sweet ache it left in the muscles afterward. He liked the way the air tasted way up high, sweet and cold as a winter peach. He liked the birds: the crows in the broken tower, the tiny little sparrows that nested in cracks between the stones, the ancient owl that slept in the dusty loft above the old armory. Bran knew them all.
他很喜欢攀爬时那种一石高过一石，手脚并用，聚精会神的感觉。每次他都先把靴子脱掉，然后光着脚丫爬墙，如此一来让他觉得自己多出两只手。他喜欢每次事后浑身肌肉那种疲累却甜丝丝的酸疼；喜欢高处清冽的空气，冰冷甘美宛如冬雪甜桃；喜欢各式各样的鸟类，包括群聚残塔上的大乌鸦，筑巢乱石间的小麻雀和栖息在旧武器库积满灰尘阁楼里的老夜枭。布兰对这些事物通通了如指掌。
Most of all, he liked going places that no one else could go, and seeing the grey sprawl of Winterfell in a way that no one else ever saw it. It made the whole castle Bran’s secret place.
不过他最喜欢的还是登上人迹罕至的地方，看着城堡以一种不曾为他人展示的样貌，在眼前灰蒙蒙地呈现出来。整座临冬城似乎都因此成了布兰的秘密基地。
His favorite haunt was the broken tower. Once it had been a watchtower, the tallest in Winterfell. A long time ago, a hundred years before even his father had been born, a lightning strike had set it afire. The top third of the structure had collapsed inward, and the tower had never been rebuilt. Sometimes his father sent ratters into the base of the tower, to clean out the nests they always found among the jumble of fallen stones and charred and rotten beams. But no one ever got up to the jagged top of the structure now except for Bran and the crows.
他对曾是临冬城最高瞭望台的残塔情有独钟。很久很久以前，在他父亲出生前约一百年，高塔遭暴雷击中，起火燃烧，顶端三分之一的建筑朝塔内崩塌，自此以后始终没有重建。父亲偶尔会派人进到残塔底层清理断垣残壁间的老鼠窝，然而除了布兰和乌鸦，从来没有人登上过塔顶废墟。
He knew two ways to get there. You could climb straight up the side of the tower itself, but the stones were loose, the mortar that held them together long gone to ash, and Bran never liked to put his full weight on them.
他知道两种登上塔顶的途径，一是直接从残塔外围爬上去，但是由于当年刷的泥浆早已干燥风化，砖石容易松落，因此布兰爬的时候不太敢把重心放在上面。
The best way was to start from the godswood, shinny up the tall sentinel, and cross over the armory and the guards hall, leaping roof to roof, barefoot so the guards wouldn’t hear you overhead. That brought you up to the blind side of the First Keep, the oldest part of the castle, a squat round fortress that was taller than it looked. Only rats and spiders lived there now but the old stones still made for good climbing. You could go straight up to where the gargoyles leaned out blindly over empty space, and swing from gargoyle to gargoyle, hand over hand, around to the north side. From there, if you really stretched, you could reach out and pull yourself over to the broken tower where it leaned close. The last part was the scramble up the blackened stones to the eyrie, no more than ten feet, and then the crows would come round to see if you’d brought any corn.
最好的方法还是从神木林出发，爬上高高的哨兵树，从武器库的屋顶跳到守卫室的屋顶，其间光着脚以免守卫听见，如此便可顺利抵达城中最古老的首堡后方。那是座低矮的圆形堡垒，其实它比乍看上去要高得多。如今堡内虽只有老鼠和蜘蛛，但当年建筑的古老石块仍旧提供了攀爬的最佳场所。你甚至可以直接爬到眼神空洞的石像鬼雕像驻守的空旷高台，两手勾紧，从这个石像鬼悬荡到那个石像鬼，随后抵达城楼北端。接着，只要全力伸展，便可够到倾斜的残塔。最后的部分只是翻越焦黑的乱石堆登上养鹰楼，爬不到十尺，乌鸦群便会竞相迎接，看你有没有带玉米粒给它们了。
Bran was moving from gargoyle to gargoyle with the ease of long practice when he heard the voices. He was so startled he almost lost his grip. The First Keep had been empty all his life.
这天布兰一如往常，驾轻就熟地在石像鬼雕像间荡来荡去，不料却听到说话的声音。他吓得差点松手，首堡向来是个人迹罕至的地方呀！
“I do not like it,” a woman was saying. There was a row of windows beneath him, and the voice was drifting out of the last window on this side. “You should be the Hand.”
“我不喜欢这样，”有个女人的声音说。布兰下方有一排窗户，声音是从最后一扇窗里传出来的，“当首相的该是你才对。”
“Gods forbid,” a man’s voice replied lazily. “It’s not an honor I’d want. There’s far too much work involved.”
“饶了我罢，”一个男人的声音慵懒地回答，“这种苦差我可不想揽，想做的事多着呢。”
Bran hung, listening, suddenly afraid to go on. They might glimpse his feet if he tried to swing by.
布兰悬在半空，静静地听着，突然心生恐惧，不敢再往前荡，生怕经过时自己的双脚会被他们发现。
“Don’t you see the danger this puts us in?” the woman said. “Robert loves the man like a brother.”
“你难道看不出背后隐藏的危险？”女人接着说，“劳勃把那家伙当亲兄弟一样。”
“Robert can barely stomach his brothers. Not that I blame him. Stannis would be enough to give anyone indigestion.”
“劳勃最受不了他两个弟弟。我也不怪他，有史坦尼斯那样的老弟，任谁都要反胃。”
“Don’t play the fool. Stannis and Renly are one thing, and Eddard Stark is quite another. Robert will listen to Stark. Damn them both. I should have insisted that he name you, but I was certain Stark would refuse him.”
“别傻了，史坦尼斯和蓝礼是一回事，艾德·史塔克又是另一回事。劳勃对史塔克会言听计从。这两人都该下地狱，早知道我就坚持要他选你当首相。我一直以为史塔克会拒绝他。”
“We ought to count ourselves fortunate,” the man said. “The king might as easily have named one of his brothers, or even Littlefinger, gods help us. Give me honorable enemies rather than ambitious ones, and I’ll sleep more easily by night.”
“我们这样已经算走运啦，”男人道，“诸神在上，谁知道国王会不会叫他弟弟或那个小指头来当首相。比起野心勃勃的对手，让我面对讲究荣誉的敌人，可能还会睡得安稳些。”
They were talking about Father, Bran realized. He wanted to hear more. A few more feet … but they would see him if he swung out in front of the window.
布兰这才会意，他们谈论的正是父亲！他想多听一些，再靠近几尺……可他如果荡过那扇窗户，他们一定会看到他的脚。
“We will have to watch him carefully,” the woman said.
“我们得好好监视他才行。”女人说。
“I would sooner watch you,” the man said. He sounded bored. “Come back here.”
“我宁愿好好看看你，”男人说，他的语气听起来很无趣，“过来吧。”
“Lord Eddard has never taken any interest in anything that happened south of the Neck,” the woman said. “Never. I tell you, he means to move against us. Why else would he leave the seat of his power?”
“艾德公爵从没插手过南方的事务，”女人道，“从来没有。我告诉你，他明明就是要对付我们，不然何必离开他的势力中心？”
“A hundred reasons. Duty. Honor. He yearns to write his name large across the book of history, to get away from his wife, or both. Perhaps he just wants to be warm for once in his life.”
“理由多的是，责任心、荣誉感都有可能，或者他想名垂青史，或者他们夫妻不和，甚至两者皆有，也或许他只想找个温暖的地方住住而已。”
“His wife is Lady Arryn’s sister. It’s a wonder Lysa was not here to greet us with her accusations.”
“他太太是艾林夫人的姐姐，莱莎竟然没有跑到这里，用她的指控欢迎我们，已经很难得了。”
Bran looked down. There was a narrow ledge beneath the window, only a few inches wide. He tried to lower himself toward it. Too far. He would never reach.
布兰往下看去，窗子下方只有个几寸宽的窗棂，他试着放低身子，但是距离太远，够不到。
“You fret too much. Lysa Arryn is a frightened cow.”
“你想太多啦，艾林夫人不过是头吓坏的母牛嘛。”
“That frightened cow shared Jon Arryn’s bed.”
“这头母牛可是和琼恩·艾林同床共枕的。”
“If she knew anything, she would have gone to Robert before she fled King’s Landing.”
“假如她知道，早在离开君临之前就去找劳勃告状了。”
“When he had already agreed to foster that weakling son of hers at Casterly Rock? I think not. She knew the boy’s life would be hostage to her silence. She may grow bolder now that he’s safe atop the Eyrie.”
“在他刚刚决定要把她那没用的儿子送去凯岩城作养子的时候？我想不会。她自己也明白如此一来她儿子会成为人质，威胁她不准说出实情。现在回到了鹰巢城，只怕她胆子会大起来。”
“Mothers.” The man made the word sound like a curse. “I think birthing does something to your minds. You are all mad.” He laughed. It was a bitter sound. “Let Lady Arryn grow as bold as she likes. Whatever she knows, whatever she thinks she knows, she has no proof.” He paused a moment. “Or does she?”
“作母亲的都一个样，”男人把“母亲”一词说得仿佛是个诅咒，“我总认为生产会烧坏脑子，你们全都疯了。”他苦涩地笑笑，“不管她究竟知道什么，或自以为知道多少，反正她没有证据。”他停了一会儿，“她有么？”
“Do you think the king will require proof?” the woman said. “I tell you, he loves me not.”
“告诉我，你觉得国王会需要什么证据？”女人回答，“他根本就不爱我！”
“And whose fault is that, sweet sister?”
“好姐姐，这是谁的错啊？”
Bran studied the ledge. He could drop down. It was too narrow to land on, but if he could catch hold as he fell past, pull himself up … except that might make a noise, draw them to the window. He was not sure what he was hearing, but he knew it was not meant for his ears.
布兰仔细看看窗棂，他应该可以跳下去，虽然窗棂太窄，没法站稳，但他可以在坠落的时候钩住，然后再攀上去……怕只怕会弄出声音，引来他们的注意。他不太了解所听到的事情，只是很确定这些话不是说给他听的。
“You are as blind as Robert,” the woman was saying.
“你和劳勃一样都瞎了眼。”女人说。
“If you mean I see the same thing, yes,” the man said. “I see a man who would sooner die than betray his king.”
“如果你的意思是我和他看法一致，没有错，”男人答道，“我眼中的艾德·史塔克是个宁死也不愿背叛国王的人。”
“He betrayed one already, or have you forgotten?” the woman said. “Oh, I don’t deny he’s loyal to Robert, that’s obvious. What happens when Robert dies and Joff takes the throne? And the sooner that comes to pass, the safer we’ll all be. My husband grows more restless every day. Having Stark beside him will only make him worse. He’s still in love with the sister, the insipid little dead sixteen-year-old. How long till he decides to put me aside for some new Lyanna?”
“他已经背叛过一个国王，你难道忘了吗？”女人道，“噢，我不否认他对劳勃忠心耿耿，这毋庸置疑，但要是劳勃死了，小乔继承王位呢？而劳勃越早死，我们便越安全。我丈夫近来愈加焦躁不安，让史塔克随侍他身旁只会让情况恶化。他到现在还爱着那个死了的十六岁小妹，谁知道哪天他会为了新的莱安娜，把我丢到一边？”
Bran was suddenly very frightened. He wanted nothing so much as to go back the way he had come, to find his brothers. Only what would he tell them? He had to get closer, Bran realized. He had to see who was talking.
布兰突然觉得害怕极了，此时的他只想赶快循原路回去，去找他的兄弟寻求协助。然而他要告诉他们些什么呢？布兰明白自己非再靠近一点不可，他得看看说话的人是谁。
The man sighed. “You should think less about the future and more about the pleasures at hand.”
男人叹道：“你别老担心未来的事，多想想眼前的幸福罢。”
“Stop that!” the woman said. Bran heard the sudden slap of flesh on flesh, then the man’s laughter.
“少说这种话！”女人斥道。布兰听到突如其来的皮肉拍打，接着又听见男人的笑声。
Bran pulled himself up, climbed over the gargoyle, crawled out onto the roof. This was the easy way. He moved across the roof to the next gargoyle, right above the window of the room where they were talking.
布兰决定往上攀，翻过石像鬼，爬到屋顶上。这是比较容易的路径，他跑到下一只石像鬼雕像旁，恰好在传出说话声的房间正上方。
“All this talk is getting very tiresome, sister,” the man said. “Come here and be quiet.”
“好姐姐，尽说些这种事，说得我都累了。”男人说，“闭上嘴巴过来吧。”
Bran sat astride the gargoyle, tightened his legs around it, and swung himself around, upside down. He hung by his legs and slowly stretched his head down toward the window. The world looked strange upside down. A courtyard swam dizzily below him, its stones still wet with melted snow.
布兰跨坐在石像鬼雕像上，两腿夹紧，然后整个人头朝下倒转过去。他两脚紧勾住石像，缓缓地把头靠近窗边。上下颠倒的世界感觉非常怪异，庭院在他下方天旋地转地晃动，砖石上还留有未化的残雪。
Bran looked in the window.
布兰从窗外向里看去。
Inside the room, a man and a woman were wrestling. They were both naked. Bran could not tell who they were. The man’s back was to him, and his body screened the woman from view as he pushed her up against a wall.
房间内一男一女正扭成一团，两人都没穿衣服。布兰认不出他们是谁，男人背对着他，不断地将女人往墙边推挤，他的身体恰好挡住了女人的脸。
There were soft, wet sounds. Bran realized they were kissing. He watched, wide-eyed and frightened, his breath tight in his throat. The man had a hand down between her legs, and he must have been hurting her there, because the woman started to moan, low in her throat. “Stop it,” she said, “stop it, stop it. Oh, please …” But her voice was low and weak, and she did not push him away. Her hands buried themselves in his hair, his tangled golden hair, and pulled his face down to her breast.
屋内有种细小而濡湿的声音，布兰发觉他们正在亲嘴。他张大眼睛，呼吸急促，惊恐地看着房里发生的这一切。男人伸手到女人两腿间，他一定弄痛了她，因为女人开始低声呻吟：“别……别这样，”她说，“住手，住手，噢，求求你……”可她的声音细小微弱，又始终没有把他推开。她反而把双手埋进他凌乱的亮金色头发里，把他的脸往自己胸前拉。
Bran saw her face. Her eyes were closed and her mouth was open, moaning. Her golden hair swung from side to side as her head moved back and forth, but still he recognized the queen.
布兰这才见着她的脸。虽然她紧闭双眼，张嘴呻吟，金发随着头部动作而剧烈晃动，他仍然认出她是王后。
He must have made a noise. Suddenly her eyes opened, and she was staring right at him. She screamed.
此时他一定是不小心发出了什么声音，只见她突然睁开眼睛，视线直直地盯着他，然后惊声尖叫起来。
Everything happened at once then. The woman pushed the man away wildly, shouting and pointing. Bran tried to pull himself up, bending double as he reached for the gargoyle. He was in too much of a hurry. His hand scraped uselessly across smooth stone, and in his panic his legs slipped, and suddenly he was falling. There was an instant of vertigo, a sickening lurch as the window flashed past. He shot out a hand, grabbed for the ledge, lost it, caught it again with his other hand. He swung against the building, hard. The impact took the breath out of him. Bran dangled, one-handed, panting.
所有的事情都发生得好快。女人狂乱地推开男人，一边指指点点，一边大声叫嚷。布兰想把自己翻上去，使尽腰力钩住石像鬼雕像，然而他使力太急，双手只是擦过平滑的石像表面，随后他心里一怕，双腿松开，立刻就往下掉。他感到一阵晕眩，窗棂从他身边疾速闪失，一种不舒服的恶心感由胃里升起。他慌忙伸出一只手想抓住窗棂，却立刻滑开，赶紧又用另一只手牢牢抓紧。他狠狠地撞上了墙壁，猛烈的冲击力道痛得他几乎无法呼吸。布兰单手抓住窗棂，在半空中悬晃，喘不过气来。
Faces appeared in the window above him.
两个人的脸同时出现在他上方的窗边。
The queen. And now Bran recognized the man beside her. They looked as much alike as reflections in a mirror.
的确是王后。这时布兰也认出了她旁边的男人，他们相貌神似，站在一起宛如镜子里的倒影。
“He saw us,” the woman said shrilly.
“他瞧见我们了。”女人尖声道。
“So he did,” the man said.
“他是瞧见我们了。”男人说。
Bran’s fingers started to slip. He grabbed the ledge with his other hand. Fingernails dug into unyielding stone. The man reached down. “Take my hand,” he said. “Before you fall.”
布兰的手指开始松脱，他换用另一只手勾窗棂，指甲深深地陷进坚硬的岩壁。男人向下伸手。“来，”他说，“快抓住我，别要掉下去。”
Bran seized his arm and held on tight with all his strength. The man yanked him up to the ledge. “What are you doing?” the woman demanded.
布兰使出浑身力气抓住他的手，男人把他拉上窗台。“你想做什么？”女人质问。
The man ignored her. He was very strong. He stood Bran up on the sill. “How old are you, boy?”
男人没有理会她，他用健壮有力的手，把布兰扶到窗台上站稳。“小鬼，你几岁啦？”
“Seven,” Bran said, shaking with relief. His fingers had dug deep gouges in the man’s forearm. He let go sheepishly.
“七岁。”布兰听了如释重负，但仍旧不免发抖。他的指头深深抠进男人的手臂，这时连忙惭愧地放开。
The man looked over at the woman. “The things I do for love,” he said with loathing. He gave Bran a shove.
男人转头去看着女人。“好好想一想，我为爱情做了些什么。”他极不情愿地说，接着便用力把布兰朝外一推。
Screaming, Bran went backward out the window into empty air. There was nothing to grab on to. The courtyard rushed up to meet him.
布兰尖叫着飞出窗外，落进半空。这次没有任何东西可以让他抓握，庭院以疯狂的速度朝他袭来。
Somewhere off in the distance, a wolf was howling. Crows circled the broken tower, waiting for corn.
邈远处，孤狼长吼；残塔上，乌鸦盘旋，犹然等待玉米之赐。
*TYRION
第十章 提利昂
S omewhere in the great stone maze of Winterfell, a wolf howled. The sound hung over the castle like a flag of mourning.
临冬城堡的巨石迷宫深处，传来一声狼嚎。嚎叫声在堡垒间悬荡，如同一面哀悼的旗帜。
Tyrion Lannister looked up from his books and shivered, though the library was snug and warm. Something about the howling of a wolf took a man right out of his here and now and left him in a dark forest of the mind, running naked before the pack.
虽然图书馆里温暖舒适，提利昂听了却不禁从书堆里抬首，颤抖起来。狼嚎中有种神秘莫测的力量，将他硬生生自现实抽离，弃置于一片广寒的阴郁森林，浑身赤裸，在恶狼追逐下亡命奔逃。
When the direwolf howled again, Tyrion shut the heavy leather-bound cover on the book he was reading, a hundred-year-old discourse on the changing of the seasons by a long-dead maester. He covered a yawn with the back of his hand. His reading lamp was flickering, its oil all but gone, as dawn light leaked through the high windows. He had been at it all night, but that was nothing new. Tyrion Lannister was not much a one for sleeping.
当冰原狼的嚎叫声再度传来，提利昂终于忍不住阖上他正在读的书，那是一部探究季节更迭的百年古籍，出自某位早已长眠地下的老学士之手。他打了个呵欠，用手背微微掩住嘴巴。晨色自高窗缝里泄进图书馆，他的写字灯火光摇曳，灯油已尽。他又整夜没睡，然而这也不是什么新鲜事，提利昂·兰尼斯特向来不是个需要大量睡眠的人。
His legs were stiff and sore as he eased down off the bench. He massaged some life back into them and limped heavily to the table where the septon was snoring softly, his head pillowed on an open book in front of him. Tyrion glanced at the title. A life of the Grand Maester Aethelmure, no wonder. “Chayle,” he said softly. The young man jerked up, blinking, confused, the crystal of his order swinging wildly on its silver chain. “I’m off to break my fast. See that you return the books to the shelves. Be gentle with the Valyrian scrolls, the parchment is very dry. Ayrmidon’s Engines of War is quite rare, and yours is the only complete copy I’ve ever seen.” Chayle gaped at him, still half-asleep. Patiently, Tyrion repeated his instructions, then clapped the septon on the shoulder and left him to his tasks.
他挪动僵硬酸麻的双脚下了长凳，稍事按摩之后，跛着脚走到桌边。修士正趴在桌上，轻声打鼾，头枕在面前一本敞开的大书上。提利昂瞄瞄书名，原来是《伊萨穆尔国师传记》，难怪他会看到睡着。“柴尔，”他轻声唤道，年轻修士陡地惊醒，困惑地眨眨眼，象征他身份的水晶在银项链上晃动。“我去吃早餐，记得帮我把书放回架上。不过动作轻点，这些瓦雷利亚卷轴的羊皮纸很脆弱。伊弥顿的《战争兵器》是一部很稀有的书，我这辈子只看见你这份抄本。”柴尔还没完全清醒，朝他打了个大呵欠。提利昂耐着性子又重复了一遍，然后拍拍修士的肩膀，让他去工作。
Outside, Tyrion swallowed a lungful of the cold morning air and began his laborious descent of the steep stone steps that corkscrewed around the exterior of the library tower. It was slow going; the steps were cut high and narrow, while his legs were short and twisted. The rising sun had not yet cleared the walls of Winterfell, but the men were already hard at it in the yard below. Sandor Clegane’s rasping voice drifted up to him. “The boy is a long time dying. I wish he would be quicker about it.”
走出门外，提利昂深吸一口清晨的冷空气，接着费力地走下环绕藏书塔那一级级陡峭的螺旋梯。阶梯高窄，他的脚却短小畸形又扭曲。旭日还没高过临冬城城墙，但校场里已有不少人开始练习。桑铎·克里冈刺耳的声音传了过来：“那小子拖拖拉拉地还不断气，早点死了不挺干脆？”
Tyrion glanced down and saw the Hound standing with young Joffrey as squires swarmed around them. “At least he dies quietly,” the prince replied. “It’s the wolf that makes the noise. I could scarce sleep last night.”
提利昂往下看，看到“猎狗”站在年轻的乔佛里身旁，周围簇拥着一群侍从。“至少他没吭半声，”王子说，“吵的是那只狼，吵得我昨晚快没法睡了。”
Clegane cast a long shadow across the hard-packed earth as his squire lowered the black helm over his head. “I could silence the creature, if it please you,” he said through his open visor. His boy placed a longsword in his hand. He tested the weight of it, slicing at the cold morning air. Behind him, the yard rang to the clangor of steel on steel.
克里冈的随从为他戴上黑甲头盔，他高大的身躯在硬土地上拉下长长的影子。“假如您高兴，我去叫那只东西闭嘴。”他透过打开的面罩说。这时他的随从将长剑递上，他试了试剑的重量，在清晨的冷空气里比划了几下。在他身后，广场上传来金属交击的声音。
The notion seemed to delight the prince. “Send a dog to kill a dog!” he exclaimed. “Winterfell is so infested with wolves, the Starks would never miss one.”
王子听了这主意似乎很高兴。“叫狗去杀狗！”他叫道，“反正临冬城里多的是狼，少它一条史塔克家也不会发现。”
Tyrion hopped off the last step onto the yard. “I beg to differ, nephew,” he said. “The Starks can count past six. Unlike some princes I might name.”
提利昂跳过最后一级阶梯，下到场子。“好外甥，真不好意思，”他说，“史塔克家的人会数数，不像某位王子，连六都算不到。”
Joffrey had the grace at least to blush.
乔佛里至少知道脸红。
“A voice from nowhere,” Sandor said. He peered through his helm, looking this way and that. “Spirits of the air!”
“有声音，”桑铎道，他故意从面罩里向外瞧，左顾右盼地道，“莫非是空气中的精灵！”
The prince laughed, as he always laughed when his bodyguard did this mummer’s farce. Tyrion was used to it. “Down here.”
王子笑了，每次他的贴身护卫作假演戏，都能把他逗得咯咯笑。提利昂早就不以为意。“下面。”
The tall man peered down at the ground, and pretended to notice him. “The little lord Tyrion,” he said. “My pardons. I did not see you standing there.”
高大的桑铎往下瞟了一眼，然后假装刚发现似的道：“原来是提利昂小少爷，”他说，“请您原谅，我方才没见您站这儿呢。”
“I am in no mood for your insolence today.” Tyrion turned to his nephew. “Joffrey, it is past time you called on Lord Eddard and his lady, to offer them your comfort.”
“我现在没心情跟你计较，”提利昂转向他的外甥，“乔佛里，你快去拜见史塔克公爵和夫人，不然就晚了。你要向他们表达你的哀悼，请他们宽心。”
Joffrey looked as petulant as only a boy prince can look. “What good will my comfort do them?”
乔佛里听罢立刻露出少不更事的暴躁脸色：“我请他们宽心有什么用？”
“None,” Tyrion said. “Yet it is expected of you. Your absence has been noted.”
“一点用都没有，”提利昂回答，“但这是应尽的礼数，不然大家会注意到你刻意缺席。”
“The Stark boy is nothing to me,” Joffrey said. “I cannot abide the wailing of women.”
“那史塔克小孩算什么东西，”乔佛里说，“我可不想去听老女人哭哭啼啼。”
Tyrion Lannister reached up and slapped his nephew hard across the face. The boy’s cheek began to redden.
提利昂·兰尼斯特踮起脚尖，狠狠地摔了侄子一个大耳光，男孩的脸颊立刻红肿起来。
“One word,” Tyrion said, “and I will hit you again.”
“你敢再说一句，”提利昂道，“我就再赏你一记耳光。”
“I’m going to tell Mother!” Joffrey exclaimed.
“我要去告诉妈妈！”乔佛里喊。
Tyrion hit him again. Now both cheeks flamed.
提利昂又打了他一个巴掌，这下子他两边脸颊都一般通红了。
“You tell your mother,” Tyrion told him. “But first you get yourself to Lord and Lady Stark, and you fall to your knees in front of them, and you tell them how very sorry you are, and that you are at their service if there is the slightest thing you can do for them or theirs in this desperate hour, and that all your prayers go with them. Do you understand? Do you?”
“随你去跟她怎么说，”提利昂告诉他，“但你首先给我去乖乖拜见史塔克公爵夫妇，我要你在他们面前跪下，说你自己感到非常遗憾，说即便是最微不足道的事情，只要能让他们宽心，你都愿意赴汤蹈火在所不辞，最后还要为他们献上你最虔诚的祝祷，你听懂了没有？听懂了没有？”
The boy looked as though he was going to cry. Instead, he managed a weak nod. Then he turned and fled headlong from the yard, holding his cheek. Tyrion watched him run.
男孩一副泫然欲泣的模样，但还是勉为其难地点点头，然后转身捂着脸颊，横冲直撞地跑离广场。提利昂目送他远去。
A shadow fell across his face. He turned to find Clegane looming overhead like a cliff. His soot-dark armor seemed to blot out the sun. He had lowered the visor on his helm. It was fashioned in the likeness of a snarling black hound, fearsome to behold, but Tyrion had always thought it a great improvement over Clegane’s hideously burned face.
一团黑影突然笼罩住他，他转过头，发现高大的克里冈正如同陡峭绝壁般阴恻恻地朝他逼近，煤烟色的黑甲宛如灿烂阳光中的污点。他已经放下了头盔上的面罩，面罩的形状是一只咧嘴咆哮的凶狠猎犬，令人怵目惊心，不过提利昂认为比起克里冈那张烧得稀烂的脸，这面罩已算美得太多。
“The prince will remember that, little lord,” the Hound warned him. The helm turned his laugh into a hollow rumble.
“大人，王子不会轻易忘记您刚才对他的举动的。”猎狗警告他，克里冈的声音从头盔里传来，原本的狞笑成了空洞的轰隆。
“I pray he does,” Tyrion Lannister replied. “If he forgets, be a good dog and remind him.” He glanced around the courtyard. “Do you know where I might find my brother?”
“他记得最好，”提利昂·兰尼斯特回答，“哪天要是他忘了，你这条狗可要好好提醒他。”他环视广场，又问：“你知道我哥哥在哪儿？”
“Breaking fast with the queen.”
“正与王后共进早餐。”
“Ah,” Tyrion said. He gave Sandor Clegane a perfunctory nod and walked away as briskly as his stunted legs would carry him, whistling. He pitied the first knight to try the Hound today. The man did have a temper.
“啊哈。”提利昂道，他半敷衍地朝桑铎·克里冈点头答谢，然后提起那双畸形的腿，尽全力快步离开，心里可怜今天首位与猎狗过招的骑士，那家伙正在气头上。
A cold, cheerless meal had been laid out in the morning room of the Guest House. Jaime sat at table with Cersei and the children, talking in low, hushed voices.
客房的早餐室里摆了一桌冰冷而了无生气的餐点，詹姆、瑟曦和公主王子们坐在一起，低声交头接耳。
“Is Robert still abed?” Tyrion asked as he seated himself, uninvited, at the table.
“劳勃还没起床？”提利昂没等他们招呼，径自在餐桌前坐下。
His sister peered at him with the same expression of faint distaste she had worn since the day he was born. “The king has not slept at all,” she told him. “He is with Lord Eddard. He has taken their sorrow deeply to heart.”
姐姐用那种打从他出生起便惯有的鄙视眼神瞟了他一眼：“国王根本没睡。他整晚和史塔克大人在一起，难过得心都快碎了。”
“He has a large heart, our Robert,” Jaime said with a lazy smile. There was very little that Jaime took seriously. Tyrion knew that about his brother, and forgave it. During all the terrible long years of his childhood, only Jaime had ever shown him the smallest measure of affection or respect, and for that Tyrion was willing to forgive him most anything.
“咱们的好劳勃那颗心倒是挺大的。”詹姆慵懒地微笑。提利昂很清楚哥哥那对凡事都蛮不在乎的个性，因此不想跟他计较。自己过去那段惨痛而漫长的童年岁月里，只有詹姆对他有过那么一丝感情和尊重，光为这一点，提利昂就不愿跟他计较任何事。
A servant approached. “Bread,” Tyrion told him, “and two of those little fish, and a mug of that good dark beer to wash them down. Oh, and some bacon. Burn it until it turns black.” The man bowed and moved off. Tyrion turned back to his siblings. Twins, male and female. They looked very much the part this morning. Both had chosen a deep green that matched their eyes. Their blond curls were all a fashionable tumble, and gold ornaments shone at wrists and fingers and throats.
侍者迎上前来。“我要面包，”提利昂告诉他，“两条这种小鱼，再配上一杯上好的黑啤酒。噢，还要几片培根，记得煎焦一点。”仆人鞠了个躬告退之后，提利昂转头面对他的兄姐。这对孪生兄妹今天都穿着深绿色的衣服，正好搭配他们眼瞳的颜色；金色的卷发呈现出时髦的波浪，金饰在他们的手腕、指间和颈项上闪闪发亮，两人看起来真像一个模子刻出的雕塑。
Tyrion wondered what it would be like to have a twin, and decided that he would rather not know. Bad enough to face himself in a looking glass every day. Another him was a thought too dreadful to contemplate.
提利昂不禁暗忖，若自己也有个双胞兄弟，不知会是什么样？不过想归想，他决定还是不要成真的好。每天在镜子前面对自己已经够糟，要再多出个长得和他一副德行的人，那还了得？
Prince Tommen spoke up. “Do you have news of Bran, Uncle?”
这时托曼王子开口问：“舅舅，你知道布兰现在怎么样了？”
“I stopped by the sickroom last night,” Tyrion announced. “There was no change. The maester thought that a hopeful sign.”
“我昨晚经过病房时，”提利昂回答，“病情既没恶化也没好转，学士认为还有希望。”
“I don’t want Brandon to die,” Tommen said timorously. He was a sweet boy. Not like his brother, but then Jaime and Tyrion were somewhat less than peas in a pod themselves.
“我希望布兰登不要死。”托曼怯生生地说。他是个可爱的孩子，一点也不像他哥哥。不过话说回来，詹姆和提利昂两人也没什么共通之处。
“Lord Eddard had a brother named Brandon as well,” Jaime mused. “One of the hostages murdered by Targaryen. It seems to be an unlucky name.”
“史塔克大人有个哥哥也叫布兰登，”詹姆饶富兴味地说，“后来作人质被坦格利安家给杀了。看来这名字还真不吉利。”
“Oh, not so unlucky as all that, surely,” Tyrion said. The servant brought his plate. He ripped off a chunk of black bread.
“呵，还不至于不吉利到那种程度啦。”提利昂道。此时侍者送来了餐点，他随即撕下一大块黑麦面包。
Cersei was studying him warily. “What do you mean?”
瑟曦正满怀戒心地盯着他瞧。“你这话什么意思？”
Tyrion gave her a crooked smile. “Why, only that Tommen may get his wish. The maester thinks the boy may yet live.” He took a sip of beer.
提利昂不怀好意地朝她笑笑：“没别的意思，只是恭祝托曼如愿以偿啰。老学士说那孩子活下来的机会很大，所以……”说完他啜了口啤酒。
Myrcella gave a happy gasp, and Tommen smiled nervously, but it was not the children Tyrion was watching. The glance that passed between Jaime and Cersei lasted no more than a second, but he did not miss it. Then his sister dropped her gaze to the table. “That is no mercy. These northern gods are cruel to let the child linger in such pain.”
弥赛听了高兴得惊叫出声，托曼也露出腼腆的微笑，然而提利昂注意的却不是他俩的反应。詹姆和瑟曦交换眼神的时间不过一秒，但他可没错过。接着他姐姐低下头，视线垂到餐桌上。“老天真残忍。这些北方的神，竟让一个年幼的孩子苟延残喘，实在是太狠毒了。”
“What were the maester’s words?” Jaime asked.
“老学士具体是怎么说的？”詹姆问。
The bacon crunched when he bit into it. Tyrion chewed thoughtfully for a moment and said, “He thinks that if the boy were going to die, he would have done so already. It has been four days with no change.”
提利昂咬了口培根，发出松脆的声响。他若有所思地嚼了一会儿方才开口：“他认为那孩子要死早就死了，不会这样拖了四天毫无动静。”
“Will Bran get better, Uncle?” little Myrcella asked. She had all of her mother’s beauty, and none of her nature.
“舅舅，布兰会好起来么？”小弥赛菈又问。她从母亲那里继承了所有的美貌，却丝毫没有半点瑟曦狠毒的性格。
“His back is broken, little one,” Tyrion told her. “The fall shattered his legs as well. They keep him alive with honey and water, or he would starve to death. Perhaps, if he wakes, he will be able to eat real food, but he will never walk again.”
“小宝贝，他的背摔断了，”提利昂告诉她，“两只脚也都残废。他们现在喂他蜂蜜和开水，不然他会活活饿死。也许等他醒来之后，可以吃东西，但却一辈子都别想走路了。”
“If he wakes,” Cersei repeated. “Is that likely?”
“等他醒来，”瑟曦重复了一遍，“你觉得有可能？”
“The gods alone know,” Tyrion told her. “The maester only hopes.” He chewed some more bread. “I would swear that wolf of his is keeping the boy alive. The creature is outside his window day and night, howling. Every time they chase it away, it returns. The maester said they closed the window once, to shut out the noise, and Bran seemed to weaken. When they opened it again, his heart beat stronger.”
“只有天上诸神知道，”提利昂答道，“老师傅只是揣测罢了。”他又咬了几口面包，“不过我敢说那孩子的狼是支持他活下去的原动力，它每天不分昼夜守在窗外，叫个不停，怎么赶也赶不走。老师傅说他们曾关上窗子，以为如此便能减少噪音，谁知布兰的情况却立刻恶化，后来他们打开窗户，他又转危为安。”
The queen shuddered. “There is something unnatural about those animals,” she said. “They are dangerous. I will not have any of them coming south with us.”
王后颤声道：“那些动物古怪极了，”她说，“瞧那模样就很危险，我绝不准它们随我们回南方去。”
Jaime said, “You’ll have a hard time stopping them, sister. They follow those girls everywhere.”
詹姆道：“好姐姐，我看你是阻止不了的，它们和女孩可是形影不离呢。”
Tyrion started on his fish. “Are you leaving soon, then?”
提利昂开始吃他的烤鱼。“这么说你们很快就要动身了？”
“Not near soon enough,” Cersei said. Then she frowned. “Are we leaving?” she echoed. “What about you? Gods, don’t tell me you are staying here?”
“我还嫌不够快。”瑟曦说。接着她突然皱眉，“‘我们’？那你呢？诸神在上，别跟我说你想留在这种鬼地方。”
Tyrion shrugged. “Benjen Stark is returning to the Night’s Watch with his brother’s bastard. I have a mind to go with them and see this Wall we have all heard so much of.”
提利昂耸耸肩：“班扬·史塔克要带他哥哥的私生子返回守夜人军团，我打算跟他们一起走，好亲眼见识见识传说中的绝境长城。”
Jaime smiled. “I hope you’re not thinking of taking the black on us, sweet brother.”
詹姆笑道：“好弟弟，你可别玩得太高兴，也当起黑衣弟兄啦。”
Tyrion laughed. “What, me, celibate? The whores would go begging from Dorne to Casterly Rock. No, I just want to stand on top of the Wall and piss off the edge of the world.”
提利昂哈哈大笑：“呵，叫我打一辈子光棍？那怎么成，全国的妓女都会抗议的。放心，我不过是想爬上长城，对着世界的边缘撒泡尿罢了。”
Cersei stood abruptly. “The children don’t need to hear this filth. Tommen, Myrcella, come.” She strode briskly from the morning room, her train and her pups trailing behind her.
瑟曦霍地起身：“够了，别当着孩子们的面说这种粗话。托曼，弥赛菈，我们走。”她快步离开饭厅，仆人和孩子们簇拥在后。
Jaime Lannister regarded his brother thoughtfully with those cool green eyes. “Stark will never consent to leave Winterfell with his son lingering in the shadow of death.”
詹姆·兰尼斯特用他那双冰冷碧眼打量着他的弟弟：“如今史塔克的儿子生死未卜，我看他决计不会放心离开临冬城。”
“He will if Robert commands it,” Tyrion said. “And Robert will command it. There is nothing Lord Eddard can do for the boy in any case.”
“如果劳勃下了命令，他肯定会走。”提利昂道，“而劳勃一定会命令他南下，反正史塔克大人对他儿子根本爱莫能助。”
“He could end his torment,” Jaime said. “I would, if it were my son. It would be a mercy.”
“他可以帮他早日解脱，”詹姆道，“如果是我儿子，我就会这么干，这才是为他好。”
“I advise against putting that suggestion to Lord Eddard, sweet brother,” Tyrion said. “He would not take it kindly.”
“亲爱的哥哥呀，我可不建议你把这话拿去对史塔克大人讲。”提利昂道，“他可不会了解你的好心肠哟。”
“Even if the boy does live, he will be a cripple. Worse than a cripple. A grotesque. Give me a good clean death.”
“就算那孩子活下来，也成了跛子。恐怕连跛子都不如，根本就是个畸形的怪胎。我宁可干脆利落地死。”
Tyrion replied with a shrug that accentuated the twist of his shoulders. “Speaking for the grotesques,” he said, “I beg to differ. Death is so terribly final, while life is full of possibilities.”
提利昂用耸肩来回应这番话，只是这个动作更突显出他的驼背。“畸形怪胎，”他说，“不是我多嘴，但死了就什么都没了，活着起码还能充满希望。”
Jaime smiled. “You are a perverse little imp, aren’t you?”
詹姆微笑道：“你这小恶魔还真心术不正，是吧？”
“Oh, yes,” Tyrion admitted. “I hope the boy does wake. I would be most interested to hear what he might have to say.”
“呵，那当然，”提利昂承认，“我真心希望那孩子活过来，不为别的，我想听听他还知道些什么。”
His brother’s smile curdled like sour milk. “Tyrion, my sweet brother,” he said darkly, “there are times when you give me cause to wonder whose side you are on.”
哥哥的笑容像酸败的牛奶般突然僵住。“提利昂，我亲爱的好弟弟，”他阴阴地说，“有时候我还真不知道你站在哪一边。”
Tyrion’s mouth was full of bread and fish. He took a swallow of strong black beer to wash it all down, and grinned up wolfishly at Jaime. “Why, Jaime, my sweet brother,” he said, “you wound me. You know how much I love my family.”
提利昂满嘴都是面包和煎鱼，他灌了一大口黑啤酒把食物冲下肚，露出狼一般的笑容对詹姆笑笑：“唉，我最亲爱的詹姆哥哥呀，”他说，“你这话好伤我的心，你难道不知我最爱家人了吗？”
*JON
第十一章 琼恩
J on climbed the steps slowly, trying not to think that this might be the last time ever. Ghost padded silently beside him. Outside, snow swirled through the castle gates, and the yard was all noise and chaos, but inside the thick stone walls it was still warm and quiet. Too quiet for Jon’s liking.
琼恩缓步爬上楼梯，虽然知道这是他最后一次爬这楼梯了，却又尽力抛开这些念头。白灵无声地跟在身边，外面正下着雪，雪花飞进城门。广场上人声喧嚣，熙来攘往，但在厚重的石墙内，仍旧温暖而静谧，宁静得琼恩有些受不了。
He reached the landing and stood for a long moment, afraid. Ghost nuzzled at his hand. He took courage from that. He straightened, and entered the room.
他抵达门外，独自伫立了很长时间，心中满怀恐惧。白灵用鼻子磨蹭他的手，他借此找到勇气，于是挺起胸膛，走进房内。
Lady Stark was there beside his bed. She had been there, day and night, for close on a fortnight. Not for a moment had she left Bran’s side. She had her meals brought to her there, and chamber pots as well, and a small hard bed to sleep on, though it was said she had scarcely slept at all. She fed him herself, the honey and water and herb mixture that sustained life. Not once did she leave the room. So Jon had stayed away.
史塔克夫人坐在床边。最近两个星期以来，她几乎日日夜夜寸步不离地守着布兰。她差人把餐点送到房里，以及便壶，和一张小硬板床，但人们都说她根本没阖过眼。她亲自用蜂蜜、开水和草药混合的饮料喂养布兰。她不曾离开房间，因此琼恩始终避得远远的。
But now there was no more time.
但他已经不能再等下去了。
He stood in the door for a moment, afraid to speak, afraid to come closer. The window was open. Below, a wolf howled. Ghost heard and lifted his head.
他在门廊里站了好一阵子，不敢作声，也不敢靠近。窗户敞得大开，楼下传来孤狼长嚎之声，白灵听见便抬起了头。
Lady Stark looked over. For a moment she did not seem to recognize him. Finally she blinked. “What are you doing here?” she asked in a voice strangely flat and emotionless.
史塔克夫人转过头来，起初并没认出他，许久之后她才眨眼问：“你在这里做什么？”语调平板，格外地了无生气。
“I came to see Bran,” Jon said. “To say good-bye.”
“我来探望布兰，”琼恩回答，“来向他道别。”
Her face did not change. Her long auburn hair was dull and tangled. She looked as though she had aged twenty years. “You’ve said it. Now go away.”
她依旧面无表情，原本蓬厚的褐红色长发垂头丧气地纠缠乱成一团，看上去仿佛一夕之间老了二十岁。“你已经达到了目的，走吧。”
Part of him wanted only to flee, but he knew that if he did he might never see Bran again. He took a nervous step into the room. “Please,” he said.
他恨不得拔腿就跑，但他很清楚自己这辈子很可能再也见不着布兰了，于是他反而不安地朝屋里跨了一步：“求求你让我见他一面吧。”
Something cold moved in her eyes. “I told you to leave,” she said. “We don’t want you here.”
她眼里闪过一道寒光。“我叫你走开，”她冷冷地说，“我们不欢迎你。”
Once that would have sent him running. Once that might even have made him cry. Now it only made him angry. He would be a Sworn Brother of the Night’s Watch soon, and face worse dangers than Catelyn Tully Stark. “He’s my brother,” he said.
若是从前，她这席话准会把他吓得没命奔逃，羞得泪流满面，但是现在，却只让他怒火中烧。他即将宣誓加入守夜人的黑衣军团，届时他将面对比凯特琳·徒利·史塔克更骇人的危险。“好歹我是他哥哥。”他说。
“Shall I call the guards?”
“你要我叫警卫吗？”
“Call them,” Jon said, defiant. “You can’t stop me from seeing him.” He crossed the room, keeping the bed between them, and looked down on Bran where he lay.
“你尽管叫，”琼恩愤愤地道，“但你阻止不了我见他一面的。”说完他穿过房间，走到病床的另一边，低头看着布兰。
She was holding one of his hands. It looked like a claw. This was not the Bran he remembered. The flesh had all gone from him. His skin stretched tight over bones like sticks. Under the blanket, his legs bent in ways that made Jon sick. His eyes were sunken deep into black pits; open, but they saw nothing. The fall had shrunken him somehow. He looked half a leaf, as if the first strong wind would carry him off to his grave.
她正握着布兰的一只手，可那只手看起来不像手，倒像爪子。眼前的病人已非琼恩记忆中那个布兰，他形容枯槁，骨瘦如柴，两脚在毛毯下蜷曲成令人作呕的形状。他的双眼深陷，活像两个黑色的窟窿，张开着，却仿若茫然。他看起来正如一片弱不经风的孤叶，一阵劲风便足以将他吹动飘散。
Yet under the frail cage of those shattered ribs, his chest rose and fell with each shallow breath.
但是在那身支离破碎的骨架下，他的胸膛正随着轻浅急促的呼吸韵律有致地起伏。
“Bran,” he said, “I’m sorry I didn’t come before. I was afraid.” He could feel the tears rolling down his cheeks. Jon no longer cared. “Don’t die, Bran. Please. We’re all waiting for you to wake up. Me and Robb and the girls, everyone …”
“布兰，”他说，“原谅我到现在才来看你，因为我好怕。”他只觉得泪水流下脸颊，但他再也不在乎了。“布兰，求求你不要死，我和罗柏、还有妹妹她们，大家都在等你醒来……”
Lady Stark was watching. She had not raised a cry. Jon took that for acceptance. Outside the window, the direwolf howled again. The wolf that Bran had not had time to name.
史塔克夫人在一旁冷眼旁观，琼恩见她没有传唤守卫，猜想她应是默许了。窗外又传来冰原狼的悲吼，布兰一直没为那只小狼找到适当的名字。
“I have to go now,” Jon said. “Uncle Benjen is waiting. I’m to go north to the Wall. We have to leave today, before the snows come.” He remembered how excited Bran had been at the prospect of the journey. It was more than he could bear, the thought of leaving him behind like this. Jon brushed away his tears, leaned over, and kissed his brother lightly on the lips.
“我得走了。”琼恩道，“班扬叔叔还在等呢，我们即刻启程前往北方。趁大雪还没降下，我们得赶紧动身。”他还记得布兰是多么迫不及待要出门远行，想到要把伤成这样的弟弟抛在这里，他更伤心欲绝。琼恩擦去眼泪，凑过去俯身轻吻弟弟的双唇。
“I wanted him to stay here with me,” Lady Stark said softly.
“我只是希望他能留下来跟我作伴。”史塔克夫人轻声道。
Jon watched her, wary. She was not even looking at him. She was talking to him, but for a part of her, it was as though he were not even in the room.
琼恩满怀戒心地看着她，却发现她的视线根本不在他身上，她看似在对他说话，实际心不在焉，仿佛旁若无人。
“I prayed for it,” she said dully. “He was my special boy. I went to the sept and prayed seven times to the seven faces of god that Ned would change his mind and leave him here with me. Sometimes prayers are answered.”
“我日夜祈祷，”她呆滞地说，“他是我的心肝宝贝。我在圣堂对着诸神的七面祈祷了七次，祈祷奈德会回心转意，让布兰留下来陪我。也许是诸神实现了我的愿望。”
Jon did not know what to say. “It wasn’t your fault,” he managed after an awkward silence.
琼恩不知该说什么才好。“不是你的错。”一阵局促的沉默后，他勉强说了一句。
Her eyes found him. They were full of poison. “I need none of your absolution, bastard.”
她的视线找到了他，眼神充满怨毒。“用不着你这没娘的野种可怜我。”
Jon lowered his eyes. She was cradling one of Bran’s hands. He took the other, squeezed it. Fingers like the bones of birds. “Good-bye,” he said.
琼恩垂下眼，她正托抚着布兰的一只手，他牵起另一只，握在手中，只觉孱弱得像小鸟的骨头。“别了。”他说。
He was at the door when she called out to him. “Jon,” she said. He should have kept going, but she had never called him by his name before. He turned to find her looking at his face, as if she were seeing it for the first time.
当他走到门边时，她开口唤他。“琼恩，”她说。他实在就应该这么继续走下去，但她从没有用他的名字称呼过他。于是他转过身，发现她正盯着他的脸，仿佛这辈子第一次见到。
“Yes?” he said.
“什么？”他问。
“It should have been you,” she told him. Then she turned back to Bran and began to weep, her whole body shaking with the sobs. Jon had never seen her cry before.
“今天躺在这里的应该是你才对。”她告诉他。说完她转身朝向布兰，痛哭流涕，全身上下都随之而猛烈抽搐。琼恩以前从没见她掉下一滴眼泪。
It was a long walk down to the yard.
回到楼下广场的路，好漫长。
Outside, everything was noise and confusion. Wagons were being loaded, men were shouting, horses were being harnessed and saddled and led from the stables. A light snow had begun to fall, and everyone was in an uproar to be off.
外面到处都是车马喧嚣，乱成一团。人们高声呼喝，将货物运上车辆，为马匹套上缰绳马镫，然后牵进马厩。空中飘起细雪，每个人都急着早些处理完手边的事务，才好躲进屋中。
Robb was in the middle of it, shouting commands with the best of them. He seemed to have grown of late, as if Bran’s fall and his mother’s collapse had somehow made him stronger. Grey Wind was at his side.
罗柏置身旋涡中心，镇定自若地发号施令。这些日子以来，他似乎突然成熟了许多，似乎布兰的意外和母亲濒临崩溃逼使他不得不坚强起来。灰风随侍在他身旁。
“Uncle Benjen is looking for you,” he told Jon. “He wanted to be gone an hour ago.”
“班扬叔叔在找你，”他对琼恩说，“他本来一小时前就打算动身了。”
“I know,” Jon said. “Soon.” He looked around at all the noise and confusion. “Leaving is harder than I thought.”
“我知道，”琼恩答道，“我马上就去。”他环顾身边周遭的人马杂沓，众声喧哗。“没想到离别这么难。”
“For me too,” Robb said. He had snow in his hair, melting from the heat of his body. “Did you see him?”
“可不是么。”罗柏说。沾落他发际的雪花，正因体温而逐渐融化。“见过他了吗？”
Jon nodded, not trusting himself to speak.
琼恩点点头，不敢开口，不知道自己会说出什么话。
“He’s not going to die,” Robb said. “I know it.”
“他不会死。”罗柏道，“我知道他不会死。”
“You Starks are hard to kill,” Jon agreed. His voice was flat and tired. The visit had taken all the strength from him.
“你们史塔克的命的确很硬。”琼恩同意。他的声音有气无力，刚才的事情已经抽干了他每一分力气。
Robb knew something was wrong. “My mother …”
罗柏立刻察觉事有蹊跷。“我母亲她……”
“She was … very kind,” Jon told him.
“她……待我很亲切。”琼恩告诉他。
Robb looked relieved. “Good.” He smiled. “The next time I see you, you’ll be all in black.”
罗柏松了一口气。“那就好，”他咧嘴笑道，“下次我们碰面，你就全身黑衣黑甲了。”
Jon forced himself to smile back. “It was always my color. How long do you think it will be?”
琼恩挤出一丝笑容：“黑色本来就很配我。依你看，咱们要多久才能再见面呢？”
“Soon enough,” Robb promised. He pulled Jon to him and embraced him fiercely. “Farewell, Snow.”
“不会太久。”罗柏保证。他把琼恩拉过来，用力紧紧地抱住他。“雪诺，多保重。”
Jon hugged him back. “And you, Stark. Take care of Bran.”
琼恩也激动地紧搂着对方：“史塔克，你也一样，好好照顾布兰。”
“I will.” They broke apart and looked at each other awkwardly. “Uncle Benjen said to send you to the stables if I saw you,” Robb finally said.
“我会的。”两人松开对方，有些尴尬地对看一眼。“班扬叔叔说若我看到你，叫你到马厩去找他。”最后罗柏开口道。
“I have one more farewell to make,” Jon told him.
“我还得跟一个人说再见。”琼恩告诉他。
“Then I haven’t seen you,” Robb replied. Jon left him standing there in the snow, surrounded by wagons and wolves and horses. It was a short walk to the armory. He picked up his package and took the covered bridge across to the Keep.
“那我就没见你啰。”罗柏答道。琼恩转身离去，留罗柏独自站在雪地，被马车、小狼和马匹所包围。广场离武器库不远，琼恩拿起他的包裹，取道密闭桥梁，往主堡去了。
Arya was in her room, packing a polished ironwood chest that was bigger than she was. Nymeria was helping. Arya would only have to point, and the wolf would bound across the room, snatch up some wisp of silk in her jaws, and fetch it back. But when she smelled Ghost, she sat down on her haunches and yelped at them.
艾莉亚正在她房里收拾行李，把东西装进一个比她还高的磨亮硬木箱子。娜梅莉亚在旁帮忙，艾莉亚只消指指点点，小狼便会跑过房间，衔起她要的丝制衣料，然后乖乖地叼给小主人，她一闻到白灵的味道，便后脚着地坐了下来，发出亲昵的低吠。
Arya glanced behind her, saw Jon, and jumped to her feet. She threw her skinny arms tight around his neck. “I was afraid you were gone,” she said, her breath catching in her throat. “They wouldn’t let me out to say good-bye.”
艾莉亚朝身后瞟了一眼，瞧见是琼恩，便开心地跳了起来。她伸出那双瘦削的臂膀紧紧搂住他的脖子。“我好怕你已经走了，”她上气不接下气地说，“他们不准我下去说再见。”
“What did you do now?” Jon was amused.
“你又闯了什么祸啦？”琼恩饶富兴味地问。
Arya disentangled herself from him and made a face. “Nothing. I was all packed and everything.” She gestured at the huge chest, no more than a third full, and at the clothes that were scattered all over the room. “Septa Mordane says I have to do it all over. My things weren’t properly folded, she says. A proper southron lady doesn’t just throw her clothes inside her chest like old rags, she says.”
艾莉亚放开他，然后扮了个鬼脸说：“没什么，本来我的东西都收拾好了，”她指着那个还没装到三分之一的巨大箱子，以及散了一地的衣物，“茉丹修女却说我没把衣服摺得漂漂亮亮的，所以得重新来过。她还说规矩的南方小姐绝不会把衣服像破布似的一股脑儿通通扔进箱子里。”
“Is that what you did, little sister?”
“小妹呀，你把衣服像破布一样扔进箱子？”
“Well, they’re going to get all messed up anyway,” she said. “Who cares how they’re folded?”
“哎哟，反正这些衣服迟早也要乱成一团嘛，”她说，“谁管它有没有摺好？”
“Septa Mordane,” Jon told her. “I don’t think she’d like Nymeria helping, either.” The she-wolf regarded him silently with her dark golden eyes. “It’s just as well. I have something for you to take with you, and it has to be packed very carefully.”
“茉丹修女会啰。”琼恩告诉她，“而且我想她一定不喜欢娜梅莉亚这样帮忙的。”小母狼静静地用她那对深沉的金眸子打量他。“不管了，我有样东西要让你带上，而且这东西必须很妥善地藏好。”
Her face lit up. “A present?”
她的脸庞顿时焕发光芒。“是给我的礼物？”
“You could call it that. Close the door.”
“可以算是。去把门关起来。”
Wary but excited, Arya checked the hall. “Nymeria, here. Guard.” She left the wolf out there to warn of intruders and closed the door. By then Jon had pulled off the rags he’d wrapped it in. He held it out to her.
艾莉亚既兴奋又紧张地看看门外的回廊。“娜梅莉亚，守在这儿。”她把小狼留在门外，负责发出警讯，然后关上房门。这时琼恩已把破布包裹解开，把东西交给她。
Arya’s eyes went wide. Dark eyes, like his. “A sword,” she said in a small, hushed breath.
她睁大双眼。和他的眼睛一样，那是双颜色沉暗的眸子。“是一把剑！”她用细小的声音说，呼吸急促起来。
The scabbard was soft grey leather, supple as sin. Jon drew out the blade slowly, so she could see the deep blue sheen of the steel. “This is no toy,” he told her. “Be careful you don’t cut yourself. The edges are sharp enough to shave with.”
剑鞘是用柔软的灰皮革做成，琼恩缓缓抽出剑，好让她仔细瞧瞧剑身泛着的深蓝色金属光泽。“这可不是玩具，”他告诉她，“小心不要伤到自己，这把剑很利，利到可以用来刮胡子。”
“Girls don’t shave,” Arya said.
“女生又不用刮胡子。”艾莉亚说。
“Maybe they should. Have you ever seen the septa’s legs?”
“也许女生该刮一刮。你看过修女的腿吗？”
She giggled at him. “It’s so skinny.”
她朝他咯咯直笑。“看过，你好坏哟。”
“So are you,” Jon told her. “I had Mikken make this special. The bravos use swords like this in Pentos and Myr and the other Free Cities. It won’t hack a man’s head off, but it can poke him full of holes if you’re fast enough.”
“你不也一样？”琼恩说，“我请密肯特别打造了这把剑，潘托斯、密尔和其他自由贸易城邦的刺客用的就是这种剑。它虽然无法砍人头颅，但只要你动作够快，却可以轻易地将敌人刺得千疮百孔。”
“I can be fast,” Arya said.
“我动作很快呢。”艾利亚道。
“You’ll have to work at it every day.” He put the sword in her hands, showed her how to hold it, and stepped back. “How does it feel? Do you like the balance?”
“你以后要天天练习，”他把剑放进她的掌心，指导她握法，然后退开一步。“感觉如何，还顺手吗？”
“I think so,” Arya said.
“我觉得蛮不错。”艾莉亚回答。
“First lesson,” Jon said. “Stick them with the pointy end.”
“第一课，”琼恩正色道，“用尖的那端去刺敌人。”
Arya gave him a whap on the arm with the flat of her blade. The blow stung, but Jon found himself grinning like an idiot. “I know which end to use,” Arya said. A doubtful look crossed her face. “Septa Mordane will take it away from me.”
艾莉亚用钝的一端在他手上砰地敲了一下，虽然很痛，琼恩却不由自主地像个傻子般嘻嘻直笑。“我知道该用那一边刺人啦。”艾莉亚说，随即脸上蒙了一层疑惑，“茉丹修女一定会把剑拿走的。”
“Not if she doesn’t know you have it,” Jon said.
“假如她不知道你有这把剑，就不会把它拿走了。”
“Who will I practice with?”
“那我跟谁练习呢？”
“You’ll find someone,” Jon promised her. “King’s Landing is a true city, a thousand times the size of Winterfell. Until you find a partner, watch how they fight in the yard. Run, and ride, make yourself strong. And whatever you do …”
“你会找到对手的。”琼恩向她保证，“君临是座名副其实的大城，足足有临冬城的一千倍大。在你还没找到练习伙伴之前，仔细观察校场里其他人怎么打斗。多跑步，多骑马，把身体养壮。还有，无论如何……”
Arya knew what was coming next. They said it together.
艾莉亚知道他接下来要说些，于是两人异口同声道：
“… don’t … tell … Sansa!”
“……绝对……不要……告诉……珊莎！”
Jon messed up her hair. “I will miss you, little sister.”
琼恩揉揉她的头发：“小妹，我会想念你的。”
Suddenly she looked like she was going to cry. “I wish you were coming with us.”
突然间她的样子像要哭。“我真希望你和我们一起走。”
“Different roads sometimes lead to the same castle. Who knows?” He was feeling better now. He was not going to let himself be sad. “I better go. I’ll spend my first year on the Wall emptying chamber pots if I keep Uncle Ben waiting any longer.”
“殊途不见得不能同归，谁知道将来怎么样呢？”他心情渐渐开朗，决定不再沮丧下去。“我该走了。我再这样让班扬叔叔等下去，恐怕在长城的第一年就得天天清理大小便了。”
Arya ran to him for a last hug. “Put down the sword first,” Jon warned her, laughing. She set it aside almost shyly and showered him with kisses.
艾莉亚奔向他，做最后一次拥抱。“先把剑放下。”他笑着警告她。她红着脸把剑丢在一旁，然后拼命吻他。
When he turned back at the door, she was holding it again, trying it for balance. “I almost forgot,” he told her. “All the best swords have names.”
他转身朝门口走去时，她已经又拾起剑，试探着挥舞。“我差点忘了，”他对她说，“大凡好剑都有自己的名讳。”
“Like Ice,” she said. She looked at the blade in her hand. “Does this have a name? Oh, tell me.”
“像是‘寒冰’？”她看着手中剑，“这把剑也有名字吗？哇，快告诉我嘛。”
“Can’t you guess?” Jon teased. “Your very favorite thing.”
“你难道猜不出来？”琼恩揶揄，“就是你最心爱的东西呀。”
Arya seemed puzzled at first. Then it came to her. She was that quick. They said it together:
艾莉亚乍听之下满头雾水，但随即恍然大悟，她的反应就是这么迅捷。于是两人再度异口同声道：
“Needle!”
“缝衣针！”
The memory of her laughter warmed him on the long ride north.
记忆中她的笑声，在后来北行的漫长路上，始终温暖着他的心房。
*DAENERYS
第十二章 丹妮莉丝
D aenerys Targaryen wed Khal Drogo with fear and barbaric splendor in a field beyond the walls of Pentos, for the Dothraki believed that all things of importance in a man’s life must be done beneath the open sky.
丹妮莉丝·坦格利安满心恐惧，在潘托斯城郊草原上与卓戈卡奥成了婚。之所以选在这里，是因为多斯拉克人认为所有的人生大事，都应该让苍天作见证。
Drogo had called his khalasar to attend him and they had come, forty thousand Dothraki warriors and uncounted numbers of women, children, and slaves. Outside the city walls they camped with their vast herds, raising palaces of woven grass, eating everything in sight, and making the good folk of Pentos more anxious with every passing day.
卓戈号召他的卡拉萨参加婚礼，他们便都如约前来，包括浩浩荡荡四万名多斯拉克武士，以及难以计数的妇孺奴隶。他们带着为数众多的牲口，扎营于城墙之外，快速搭成草织的宫殿，吃遍目光所及的一切食物，让潘托斯的居民越来越不安。
“My fellow magisters have doubled the size of the city guard,” Illyrio told them over platters of honey duck and orange snap peppers one night at the manse that had been Drogo’s. The khal had joined his khalasar , his estate given over to Daenerys and her brother until the wedding.
“其他总督把城市守卫翻了一倍。”有天晚上，伊利里欧边吃着一碟碟蜂蜜烤鸭和胡椒橙，边对他们说。卡奥已经回到卡拉萨之中，他的宅院就暂时让丹妮莉丝和哥哥居住，直到婚礼结束。
“Best we get Princess Daenerys wedded quickly before they hand half the wealth of Pentos away to sellswords and bravos,” Ser Jorah Mormont jested. The exile had offered her brother his sword the night Dany had been sold to Khal Drogo; Viserys had accepted eagerly. Mormont had been their constant companion ever since.
“我看咱们得尽快让丹妮莉丝公主嫁出门，免得潘托斯的财富都给佣兵和无赖赚跑了。”乔拉·莫尔蒙爵士玩笑道。丹妮被卖给卓戈卡奥的当晚，这位遭放逐的骑士便提议为哥哥效力。韦赛里斯迫不及待地答应下来，从那之后，莫尔蒙便成了随侍他们左右的伙伴。
Magister Illyrio laughed lightly through his forked beard, but Viserys did not so much as smile. “He can have her tomorrow, if he likes,” her brother said. He glanced over at Dany, and she lowered her eyes. “So long as he pays the price.”
伊利里欧总督抖着胡子轻轻笑了，但韦赛里斯连嘴唇都没动一下。“他高兴的话，明天就要她也行。”哥哥说着瞟了丹妮一眼，她垂下眼睛。“只要他信守诺言。”
Illyrio waved a languid hand in the air, rings glittering on his fat fingers. “I have told you, all is settled. Trust me. The khal has promised you a crown, and you shall have it.”
伊利里欧无力地挥挥手，胖手指上一堆戒指闪闪发光。“我跟您说过，一切都打点妥当啦。卡奥既已答应要给你一顶王冠，他就一定说到做到。”
“Yes, but when?”
“好吧，可什么时候给呢？”
“When the khal chooses,” Illyrio said. “He will have the girl first, and after they are wed he must make his procession across the plains and present her to the dosh khaleen at Vaes Dothrak. After that, perhaps. If the omens favor war.”
“这就要看卡奥他的意思了。”伊利里欧道，“他当然会先要这女孩，等完婚之后，还要带着人马横跨草原，带她晋见维斯·多斯拉克的多希卡林。在那之后，他应该会实现诺言，如果预兆显示战争吉利的话。”
Viserys seethed with impatience. “I piss on Dothraki omens. The Usurper sits on my father’s throne. How long must I wait?”
韦赛里斯一脸不耐烦：“我管他妈的多斯拉克预兆。篡夺者坐在我父王的王座上，我还得等多久？”
Illyrio gave a massive shrug. “You have waited most of your life, great king. What is another few months, another few years?”
伊利里欧耸耸宽大的肩膀。“伟大的国王啊，您已经等了大半辈子，再多等几月……就算再多等个几年，又怎么样呢？”
Ser Jorah, who had traveled as far east as Vaes Dothrak, nodded in agreement. “I counsel you to be patient, Your Grace. The Dothraki are true to their word, but they do things in their own time. A lesser man may beg a favor from the khal , but must never presume to berate him.”
交游广泛，足迹远至维斯·多斯拉克的乔拉爵士点头同意。“陛下，我也建议您耐心等待。多斯拉克人言出必践，但方式却得照他们的意思来。地位较低的人或许可以恳求卡奥帮忙，但千万不能用以上对下之姿教训他。”
Viserys bristled. “Guard your tongue, Mormont, or I’ll have it out. I am no lesser man, I am the rightful Lord of the Seven Kingdoms. The dragon does not beg.”
韦赛里斯怒道：“莫尔蒙，你讲话最好注意点，否则小心我把你舌头给割了。我可不是什么地位较低的人，我乃堂堂七国之君，真龙传人是不会卑躬屈膝的。”
Ser Jorah lowered his eyes respectfully. Illyrio smiled enigmatically and tore a wing from the duck. Honey and grease ran over his fingers and dripped down into his beard as he nibbled at the tender meat. There are no more dragons , Dany thought, staring at her brother, though she did not dare say it aloud.
乔拉爵士恭敬地垂下眼睛。伊利里欧神秘地笑笑，撕下一只鸭翅膀，咬了起来，胡子上沾满蜂蜜和油汁。真龙已经不复存在了，丹妮怔怔地看着哥哥，却不敢大声说出来。
Yet that night she dreamt of one. Viserys was hitting her, hurting her. She was naked, clumsy with fear. She ran from him, but her body seemed thick and ungainly. He struck her again. She stumbled and fell. “You woke the dragon,” he screamed as he kicked her. “You woke the dragon, you woke the dragon.” Her thighs were slick with blood. She closed her eyes and whimpered. As if in answer, there was a hideous ripping sound and the crackling of some great fire. When she looked again, Viserys was gone, great columns of flame rose all around, and in the midst of them was the dragon. It turned its great head slowly. When its molten eyes found hers, she woke, shaking and covered with a fine sheen of sweat. She had never been so afraid …
然而那天晚上，她却梦见了一只龙。梦中韦赛里斯又在打她、欺负她。她浑身赤裸，害怕得手足无措。她想从他身边跑开，身体却不听使唤。他再度出手，把她打得踉跄倒地。“你唤醒了睡龙之怒，”他一边尖叫一边对她拳打脚踢，“你唤醒了睡龙，你唤醒了睡龙。”她的大腿淌满鲜血，正闭眼呻吟，只听一阵狰狞的撕裂，接着是一片雄浑的大火劈啪，仿佛有谁在回应。睁眼一看，韦赛里斯已经不见踪影，四周升起巨大火柱，火柱中间有一头巨龙。它缓缓转头，那对宛如熔岩的眼睛与她目光相接。这时她便醒了，醒来时浑身颤抖，冷汗直流。她这辈子从没这么害怕过……
… until the day of her wedding came at last.
……除了这场婚礼。
The ceremony began at dawn and continued until dusk, an endless day of drinking and feasting and fighting. A mighty earthen ramp had been raised amid the grass palaces, and there Dany was seated beside Khal Drogo, above the seething sea of Dothraki. She had never seen so many people in one place, nor people so strange and frightening. The horselords might put on rich fabrics and sweet perfumes when they visited the Free Cities, but out under the open sky they kept the old ways. Men and women alike wore painted leather vests over bare chests and horsehair leggings cinched by bronze medallion belts, and the warriors greased their long braids with fat from the rendering pits. They gorged themselves on horseflesh roasted with honey and peppers, drank themselves blind on fermented mare’s milk and Illyrio’s fine wines, and spat jests at each other across the fires, their voices harsh and alien in Dany’s ears.
婚宴从黎明开始，一直持续到天黑，其间充斥着无止尽的暴饮暴食和冲突打斗。草织宫殿间筑起一座土丘，丹妮被安置在卓戈卡奥身旁，位居这片多斯拉克人海之上。她从未见过这么多人聚集一起，也未见过如此奇怪又叫人害怕的族群。众位马王来自由贸易城邦拜访时也会穿戴华服，喷洒香水，然而在苍天之下，他们却遵守古老传统。不论男女，均赤裸胸膛，外罩彩绘皮背心，捆上马鬃绑腿，腰系青铜饰带。男性战士们用油坑里的动物脂肪把长长的发辫抹得乌黑光亮。他们大啖加了蜂蜜和胡椒的烤马肉，豪饮发酵马奶和伊利里欧的葡萄佳酿，隔着营火互相笑闹，话音在丹妮耳中显得格外陌生而刺耳。
Viserys was seated just below her, splendid in a new black wool tunic with a scarlet dragon on the chest. Illyrio and Ser Jorah sat beside him. Theirs was a place of high honor, just below the khal’s own bloodriders, but Dany could see the anger in her brother’s lilac eyes. He did not like sitting beneath her, and he fumed when the slaves offered each dish first to the khal and his bride, and served him from the portions they refused. He could do nothing but nurse his resentment, so nurse it he did, his mood growing blacker by the hour at each insult to his person.
韦赛里斯坐在她正下方，穿着一袭崭新黑羊毛衫，胸前绣了一头猩红色的龙。伊利里欧和乔拉爵士坐在他旁边。他们实已居于高位，仅次于卡奥的血盟卫，但丹妮仍然看出哥哥那双淡紫色眼瞳里闪着怒火。他不高兴位于她之下，更受不了每次上菜仆人都会先给卡奥和他的新娘，然后才把挑剩的拿给他。但除了暗自生气，他不能做什么，于是就这么生着闷气，表情也随着时间流逝，随着每一次对他自尊的伤害越见恶劣。
Dany had never felt so alone as she did seated in the midst of that vast horde. Her brother had told her to smile, and so she smiled until her face ached and the tears came unbidden to her eyes. She did her best to hide them, knowing how angry Viserys would be if he saw her crying, terrified of how Khal Drogo might react. Food was brought to her, steaming joints of meat and thick black sausages and Dothraki blood pies, and later fruits and sweetgrass stews and delicate pastries from the kitchens of Pentos, but she waved it all away. Her stomach was a roil, and she knew she could keep none of it down.
然而丹妮无暇他顾，置身这片广大人海之中，她只感到前所未有的孤独。哥哥要她微笑，所以她努力保持笑容，直到脸部肌肉酸疼，眼泪也不争气地流了下来。她竭力隐藏泪水，因为她太清楚要是教韦赛里斯见到会有多生气，她更害怕卓戈卡奥的反应。食物一盘盘端至眼前，有香气四溢的肉块，肥厚的黑香肠，多斯拉克血馅饼，后来还有各式水果，甜菜汤，以及做工精巧的潘托斯蛋糕，但她都一一挥手赶开。她很清楚自己的胃搅成一团，没法吞下任何东西。
There was no one to talk to. Khal Drogo shouted commands and jests down to his bloodriders, and laughed at their replies, but he scarcely glanced at Dany beside him. They had no common language. Dothraki was incomprehensible to her, and the khal knew only a few words of the bastard Valyrian of the Free Cities, and none at all of the Common Tongue of the Seven Kingdoms. She would even have welcomed the conversation of Illyrio and her brother, but they were too far below to hear her.
没有人陪她聊天解闷。卓戈卡奥朝下方的血盟卫大声嬉笑吆喝，随他们的回答而放声大笑，但他自始至终都不看身旁的丹妮一眼。他们没有共通的语言，她听不懂多斯拉克语，而卡奥只会说几句自由贸易城邦的瓦雷利亚方言，通行七国的标准话语他一窍不通。就算只能跟伊利里欧和哥哥说话，她也非常乐意，只可惜他们的座位离她实在太远。
So she sat in her wedding silks, nursing a cup of honeyed wine, afraid to eat, talking silently to herself. I am blood of the dragon , she told herself. I am Daenerys Stormborn, Princess of Dragonstone, of the blood and seed of Aegon the Conqueror .
于是她只能身披婚纱，端着一杯掺了蜂蜜的葡萄酒，不吃不动，静静地自言自语：“我是真龙传人，”她告诉自己，“我是风暴降生丹妮莉丝，龙石岛的公主，体内流着‘征服者’伊耿的血液。”
The sun was only a quarter of the way up the sky when she saw her first man die. Drums were beating as some of the women danced for the khal . Drogo watched without expression, but his eyes followed their movements, and from time to time he would toss down a bronze medallion for the women to fight over.
目睹当天第一个人丧命时，太阳才刚在天顶移动了四分之一。当时鼓声隆隆，女人们正为卡奥跳舞助兴。卓戈虽面无表情，视线却始终跟随她们的律动，不时还从腰带上解下一个青铜奖章抛过去，让她们为之争得你死我活。
The warriors were watching too. One of them finally stepped into the circle, grabbed a dancer by the arm, pushed her down to the ground, and mounted her right there, as a stallion mounts a mare. Illyrio had told her that might happen. “The Dothraki mate like the animals in their herds. There is no privacy in a khalasar , and they do not understand sin or shame as we do.”
其他战士也在旁观赏。后来其中一个终于走进舞者的圆圈，伸手攫住一位舞者的臂膀，把她按倒在地，当场就像公马和母马交配似地做了起来。伊利里欧先前就提醒过她：“多斯拉克人交配的方式和他们养的牲畜没两样。卡拉萨里毫无隐私可言，他们对罪恶和耻辱的观念也与我们完全不同。”
Dany looked away from the coupling, frightened when she realized what was happening, but a second warrior stepped forward, and a third, and soon there was no way to avert her eyes. Then two men seized the same woman. She heard a shout, saw a shove, and in the blink of an eye the arakhs were out, long razor-sharp blades, half sword and half scythe. A dance of death began as the warriors circled and slashed, leaping toward each other, whirling the blades around their heads, shrieking insults at each clash. No one made a move to interfere.
丹妮明白了眼前发生的事后，突然害怕起来，忙将视线从交合中的两人身上转开，但紧接着另一个战士也走上前，然后又是一个，很快她连想不看也没办法了。只见两名男子抓住了同一个女人，她听见一声大叫，其中一人推了对方一把，眨眼功夫，两把亚拉克弯刀便已出鞘。这是一种半剑半镰刀的武器，刀刃很长、利如剃刀。两名战士随即展开一阵死亡剑舞，绕着圈子，相互杀伐，扑跳往来，刀锋流转，喊骂不绝。没有人出手干预。
It ended as quickly as it began. The arakhs shivered together faster than Dany could follow, one man missed a step, the other swung his blade in a flat arc. Steel bit into flesh just above the Dothraki’s waist, and opened him from backbone to belly button, spilling his entrails into the dust. As the loser died, the winner took hold of the nearest woman—not even the one they had been quarreling over—and had her there and then. Slaves carried off the body, and the dancing resumed.
死斗蓦然开始，也旋即结束。亚拉克弯刀交击的速度快得丹妮跟不上，但其中一名战士脚步没站稳，他的对手立刻挥刀画出一个圆弧。刀锋砍进多斯拉克人腰部，将他自脊椎到腹部整个切开，内脏喷洒出来撒进尘土。败者挣扎惨死，胜者抓住最近的女人——还不是刚才为之而战的那个——当下做了起来。奴隶抬走尸首，舞蹈继续进行。
Magister Illyrio had warned Dany about this too. “A Dothraki wedding without at least three deaths is deemed a dull affair,” he had said. Her wedding must have been especially blessed; before the day was over, a dozen men had died.
这种情形，伊利里欧总督事前也警告过丹妮。“任何一场多斯拉克婚礼，若没有闹出至少三条人命，就算失败。”如此说来，她的婚礼想必受到上苍格外眷顾，因为在当天日落之前，一共死了十二个人。
As the hours passed, the terror grew in Dany, until it was all she could do not to scream. She was afraid of the Dothraki, whose ways seemed alien and monstrous, as if they were beasts in human skins and not true men at all. She was afraid of her brother, of what he might do if she failed him. Most of all, she was afraid of what would happen tonight under the stars, when her brother gave her up to the hulking giant who sat drinking beside her with a face as still and cruel as a bronze mask.
时间一分一秒过去，丹妮心中的恐惧却不减反增，最后她所能做的，就只剩下竭力控制自己，不要发出尖叫。她害怕这些行径怪异野蛮，宛如披人皮野兽的多斯拉克人；害怕自己达不到哥哥的期望，不知他会对自己做出什么事来；但最教她害怕的，还是当天晚上，哥哥将她交给此刻坐在她身边喝酒，面无表情，残酷得像戴着一张青铜面具的怪异巨人后，他会在星空下对她做的事。
I am the blood of the dragon , she told herself again.
“我是真龙传人。”她再度对自己说。
When at last the sun was low in the sky, Khal Drogo clapped his hands together, and the drums and the shouting and feasting came to a sudden halt. Drogo stood and pulled Dany to her feet beside him. It was time for her bride gifts.
最后，夕阳渐渐西落，卓戈卡奥拍拍手，所有的鼓声、叫喊和饮宴欢闹顿时戛然而止。卓戈起身，然后扶丹妮起来。赠送新娘礼的仪式开始了。
And after the gifts, she knew, after the sun had gone down, it would be time for the first ride and the consummation of her marriage. Dany tried to put the thought aside, but it would not leave her. She hugged herself to try to keep from shaking.
可她很清楚，当赠礼仪式结束，太阳下山之后，她就算是真正结婚。丹妮试图抛开这个念头，却徒劳无功，只能绷紧身子，想尽办法不要颤抖。
Her brother Viserys gifted her with three handmaids. Dany knew they had cost him nothing; Illyrio no doubt had provided the girls. Irri and Jhiqui were copper-skinned Dothraki with black hair and almond-shaped eyes, Doreah a fair-haired, blue-eyed Lysene girl. “These are no common servants, sweet sister,” her brother told her as they were brought forward one by one. “Illyrio and I selected them personally for you. Irri will teach you riding, Jhiqui the Dothraki tongue, and Doreah will instruct you in the womanly arts of love.” He smiled thinly. “She’s very good, Illyrio and I can both swear to that.”
哥哥韦赛里斯送她三位女仆——丹妮知道他根本没花半文钱，必定是伊利里欧掏的腰包——其中伊丽和姬琪是生着杏眼，黑发褐肤的多斯拉克人，多莉亚则是金发蓝眼的里斯女孩。“好妹妹，这些可不是普通奴婢，”她们被依序带到她跟前时，哥哥告诉她，“都是我和伊利里欧精心为你挑选的。伊丽会教你骑马，姬琪会教你多斯拉克语，多莉亚则会教你床上功夫。”他浅浅一笑，“她可是这方面的专家，我和伊利里欧都可以保证。”
Ser Jorah Mormont apologized for his gift. “It is a small thing, my princess, but all a poor exile could afford,” he said as he laid a small stack of old books before her. They were histories and songs of the Seven Kingdoms, she saw, written in the Common Tongue. She thanked him with all her heart.
乔拉·莫尔蒙爵士为他的礼物致歉：“公主殿下，这点小东西实在不成敬意，但放逐在外，一贫如洗的我就只负担得起这个了。”说着他把一小叠旧书放在她面前，那是用标准用语写成的七国历史和歌谣传奇，她满心感激地谢谢他。
Magister Illyrio murmured a command, and four burly slaves hurried forward, bearing between them a great cedar chest bound in bronze. When she opened it, she found piles of the finest velvets and damasks the Free Cities could produce … and resting on top, nestled in the soft cloth, three huge eggs. Dany gasped. They were the most beautiful things she had ever seen, each different than the others, patterned in such rich colors that at first she thought they were crusted with jewels, and so large it took both of her hands to hold one. She lifted it delicately, expecting that it would be made of some fine porcelain or delicate enamel, or even blown glass, but it was much heavier than that, as if it were all of solid stone. The surface of the shell was covered with tiny scales, and as she turned the egg between her fingers, they shimmered like polished metal in the light of the setting sun. One egg was a deep green, with burnished bronze flecks that came and went depending on how Dany turned it. Another was pale cream streaked with gold. The last was black, as black as a midnight sea, yet alive with scarlet ripples and swirls. “What are they?” she asked, her voice hushed and full of wonder.
伊利里欧总督轻声下令，四位粗壮的奴隶立刻抬着一个青铜装饰的雪松木箱快步向前。打开之后，她发现里面装满了自由贸易城邦所产最上等的天鹅绒和锦缎……其上还躺着三颗硕大的蛋。丹妮差点喘不过气来。这是她所见过最美的东西，三颗蛋外表各不相同，其上的纹彩富丽得使她以为表面镶满珠宝，而她得用两手才能抱住一颗。她小心翼翼地拿起来，本以为这是上等陶瓷、彩釉或玻璃制成，想不到却比那沉重得多，仿佛是硬石做的。蛋壳表面覆盖着细小鳞片，它们随她指头转弄，映着落日余晖，散发出宛如金属般的光泽。其中一颗是深绿色，随着丹妮转动的角度露出各式的青铜斑点；另一颗是淡乳白色，有金色条纹；最后一颗是黑的，宛如午夜汪洋，却有生气勃发的暗红波浪和旋涡。“这是什么？”她小声问，口中充满惊奇。
“Dragon’s eggs, from the Shadow Lands beyond Asshai,” said Magister Illyrio. “The eons have turned them to stone, yet still they burn bright with beauty.”
“这是来自亚夏以东阴影之地的龙蛋。”伊利里欧总督说，“历经千万年而成化石，却依旧亮丽动人。”
“I shall treasure them always.” Dany had heard tales of such eggs, but she had never seen one, nor thought to see one. It was a truly magnificent gift, though she knew that Illyrio could afford to be lavish. He had collected a fortune in horses and slaves for his part in selling her to Khal Drogo.
“我会永远珍藏他们。”丹妮听过关于龙蛋的种种传闻，但从未亲眼目睹，更没想到会有机会见识。这实在是价值连城的厚礼，虽然她也知道伊利里欧花得起大钱。光是把她卖给卓戈卡奥，就让他赚了大批良驹和奴隶。
The khal’s bloodriders offered her the traditional three weapons, and splendid weapons they were. Haggo gave her a great leather whip with a silver handle, Cohollo a magnificent arakh chased in gold, and Qotho a double-curved dragonbone bow taller than she was. Magister Illyrio and Ser Jorah had taught her the traditional refusals for these offerings. “This is a gift worthy of a great warrior, O blood of my blood, and I am but a woman. Let my lord husband bear these in my stead.” And so Khal Drogo too received his “bride gifts.”
依照传统，卡奥的血盟卫赠与她三件耀眼武器。哈戈送她一把银柄长鞭，科霍罗送她一柄气派非凡的镀金亚拉克弯刀，柯索则送她一把比她人还高的双弧龙骨长弓。伊利里欧总督和乔拉爵士事先教过她传统的拒绝仪式。“吾血之血啊，这些都是伟大的战士应有的武器，但我仅是一介弱女子，就让我的夫君替我使用罢！”于是卓戈卡奥得到了她的“新娘礼”。
Other gifts she was given in plenty by other Dothraki: slippers and jewels and silver rings for her hair, medallion belts and painted vests and soft furs, sandsilks and jars of scent, needles and feathers and tiny bottles of purple glass, and a gown made from the skin of a thousand mice. “A handsome gift, Khaleesi,” Magister Illyrio said of the last, after he had told her what it was. “Most lucky.” The gifts mounted up around her in great piles, more gifts than she could possibly imagine, more gifts than she could want or use.
其他多斯拉克人也纷纷上前，送她许多礼物：有珠宝拖鞋、银制发环、奖章腰带、彩绘背心和轻软毛皮，纱丝和香精罐，针线、羽毛和小巧的紫玻璃瓶，以及一件以千只老鼠皮织成的睡衣。“卡丽熙①，这可是件好礼啊，”伊利里欧总督边对她解释，边说，“非常吉利的！”礼物在她身边堆得老高，远超出她的想像，更超乎她的真正需要。
And last of all, Khal Drogo brought forth his own bride gift to her. An expectant hush rippled out from the center of the camp as he left her side, growing until it had swallowed the whole khalasar . When he returned, the dense press of Dothraki gift-givers parted before him, and he led the horse to her.
最后，卓戈卡奥带来他自己的新娘礼。他大步离开她身边，一阵充满期待的静默便从营地中央散开，逐渐吞没了整个卡拉萨。他回来之时，送礼的多斯拉克人们向两边散开，原来他牵来了一匹马。
She was a young filly, spirited and splendid. Dany knew just enough about horses to know that this was no ordinary animal. There was something about her that took the breath away. She was grey as the winter sea, with a mane like silver smoke.
那是一匹年轻的小母马，精神抖擞、闪亮动人。仅凭丹妮对马有限的了解，就已经知道这并非匹寻常良驹。它有种叫她喘不过气的特质，毛发灰如冬季的海，马鬃有若银色的烟。
Hesitantly she reached out and stroked the horse’s neck, ran her fingers through the silver of her mane. Khal Drogo said something in Dothraki and Magister Illyrio translated. “Silver for the silver of your hair, the khal says.”
她有些犹豫地伸手抚摸马的脖子，任手指滑过银色马鬃。卓戈卡奥用多斯拉克语说了几句，伊利里欧总督翻译道：“卡奥说，银色的马鬃正好配上你银色的头发。”
“She’s beautiful,” Dany murmured.
“她好漂亮！”丹妮喃喃道。
“She is the pride of the khalasar,” Illyrio said. “Custom decrees that the khaleesi must ride a mount worthy of her place by the side of the khal.”
“她是全卡拉萨的骄傲，”伊利里欧说，“根据习俗，卡丽熙必须骑着与她身份地位相称的马儿，跟随在卡奥身边。”
Drogo stepped forward and put his hands on her waist. He lifted her up as easily as if she were a child and set her on the thin Dothraki saddle, so much smaller than the ones she was used to. Dany sat there uncertain for a moment. No one had told her about this part. “What should I do?” she asked Illyrio.
卓戈跨步向前，伸手环住她的腰，有如抱小孩般把她轻松抱起，让她坐上狭小的多斯拉克马鞍。这鞍比她以前习惯的那种小许多。丹妮有些困惑地坐了一会儿。没人告诉她会如此发展。“我该怎么做？”她问伊利里欧。
It was Ser Jorah Mormont who answered. “Take the reins and ride. You need not go far.”
回答的是乔拉·莫尔蒙爵士，“握起缰绳骑上一段，不用太远。”
Nervously Dany gathered the reins in her hands and slid her feet into the short stirrups. She was only a fair rider; she had spent far more time traveling by ship and wagon and palanquin than by horseback. Praying that she would not fall off and disgrace herself, she gave the filly the lightest and most timid touch with her knees.
于是丹妮紧张地双手握缰，把脚伸进矮矮的马镫里。她马术平平，只因长久以来多半乘船或搭马车、轿子旅行，骑马的机会不多。她祈祷自己不要摔下来，惹大家笑话，最后轻轻地一夹马肚。
And for the first time in hours, she forgot to be afraid. Or perhaps it was for the first time ever.
于是，这几个小时以来，她第一次忘却了恐惧。或许，是她这辈子第一次。
The silver-grey filly moved with a smooth and silken gait, and the crowd parted for her, every eye upon them. Dany found herself moving faster than she had intended, yet somehow it was exciting rather than terrifying. The horse broke into a trot, and she smiled. Dothraki scrambled to clear a path. The slightest pressure with her legs, the lightest touch on the reins, and the filly responded. She sent it into a gallop, and now the Dothraki were hooting and laughing and shouting at her as they jumped out of her way. As she turned to ride back, a firepit loomed ahead, directly in her path. They were hemmed in on either side, with no room to stop. A daring she had never known filled Daenerys then, and she gave the filly her head.
银灰的小母马步伐平稳，轻盈如丝，众人让出路来，目光全集中在她身上。丹妮发现自己骑得远比料想的要快，而她感觉到的只有兴奋，并无恐惧。马儿开步小跑，她不禁笑了起来。多斯拉克人跌跌撞撞地让开。她只需双脚微微使力，轻轻一抖缰绳，母马便立即有回应。她催马飞奔，多斯拉克人纷纷闪开，一边对她又叫又笑。当她掉转马头，准备返回时，只见前方远处有个火堆。她们两边是人，无路可走。此刻丹妮莉丝心中突然有种前所未有的勇气，她把一切都交给小母马。
The silver horse leapt the flames as if she had wings.
银色的马载她穿越熊熊烈焰，仿佛为她插上了翅膀。
When she pulled up before Magister Illyrio, she said, “Tell Khal Drogo that he has given me the wind.” The fat Pentoshi stroked his yellow beard as he repeated her words in Dothraki, and Dany saw her new husband smile for the first time.
她在伊利里欧总督面前停下，说：“请告诉卓戈卡奥，他给了我风的力量。”这位肥胖的潘托斯人捻捻黄胡子，把她的话译为多斯拉克语，接着丹妮头一次看到她的新婚丈夫露出微笑。
The last sliver of sun vanished behind the high walls of Pentos to the west just then. Dany had lost all track of time. Khal Drogo commanded his bloodriders to bring forth his own horse, a lean red stallion. As the khal was saddling the horse, Viserys slid close to Dany on her silver, dug his fingers into her leg, and said, “Please him, sweet sister, or I swear, you will see the dragon wake as it has never woken before.”
就在这时，夕阳的最后一抹余晖消失在潘托斯的高墙尽头。丹妮已完全没了时间概念。卓戈卡奥命令血盟卫们把他的坐骑牵来，那是匹精瘦的红色骏马。卡奥装配马鞍时，韦赛里斯闪到骑着银马的丹妮身边，伸出手指抠进她的大腿肉：“亲爱的好妹妹，你给我好好取悦他，否则我保证让你看看真正的唤醒睡龙是什么样子。”
The fear came back to her then, with her brother’s words. She felt like a child once more, only thirteen and all alone, not ready for what was about to happen to her.
哥哥的这番话把恐惧又带了回来。她再度觉得自己像个小孩子，只有十三岁，孤零零的，对于即将发生在身上的事毫无准备。
They rode out together as the stars came out, leaving the khalasar and the grass palaces behind. Khal Drogo spoke no word to her, but drove his stallion at a hard trot through the gathering dusk. The tiny silver bells in his long braid rang softly as he rode. “I am the blood of the dragon,” she whispered aloud as she followed, trying to keep her courage up. “I am the blood of the dragon. I am the blood of the dragon.” The dragon was never afraid.
星星出来的时候，他们一同骑马离开，将卡拉萨和草织宫殿抛在身后。卓戈卡奥一句话也没有说，径自催马狂奔，跑进愈加深沉的夜色。他长长发辫上的银铃一路轻声作响。“我是真龙传人，”她一边跟上，一边大声地对自己说，努力鼓起勇气。“我是真龙传人，我是真龙传人。”龙是不会害怕的。
Afterward she could not say how far or how long they had ridden, but it was full dark when they stopped at a grassy place beside a small stream. Drogo swung off his horse and lifted her down from hers. She felt as fragile as glass in his hands, her limbs as weak as water. She stood there helpless and trembling in her wedding silks while he secured the horses, and when he turned to look at her, she began to cry.
事后想来，她说不准他们究竟骑了多远，骑了多久，但当他们在一条小溪边的草地上停步时，天已经全黑。卓戈翻身下马，然后把她抱下来。在他手里，她觉得自己脆弱得好像玻璃，四肢无力犹如溺水。她穿着结婚礼服，站在原地颤抖，看他把马匹拴好，当他转头望她时，她的眼泪终于忍不住滑落。
Khal Drogo stared at her tears, his face strangely empty of expression. “No,” he said. He lifted his hand and rubbed away the tears roughly with a callused thumb.
卓戈卡奥看着她的泪水，脸上却奇怪地毫无表情。“不。”他抬起手，用长茧的拇指粗鲁地抹去她的泪水。
“You speak the Common Tongue,” Dany said in wonder.
“你会通用语？”丹妮惊奇地说。
“No,” he said again.
“不。”他又说。
Perhaps he had only that word, she thought, but it was one word more than she had known he had, and somehow it made her feel a little better. Drogo touched her hair lightly, sliding the silver-blond strands between his fingers and murmuring softly in Dothraki. Dany did not understand the words, yet there was warmth in the tone, a tenderness she had never expected from this man.
或许他就只懂这个字，她心想，但总比她原先想像的要好得多，这稍稍安抚了她的情绪。卓戈轻触她的头发，一边用手抚弄她亮银色的发丝，一边用多斯拉克话喃喃自语。丹妮听不懂他在说些什么，然而话中却有种温暖的感觉，一种她原本不期待会在这个男人身上找到的温柔。
He put his finger under her chin and lifted her head, so she was looking up into his eyes. Drogo towered over her as he towered over everyone. Taking her lightly under the arms, he lifted her and seated her on a rounded rock beside the stream. Then he sat on the ground facing her, legs crossed beneath him, their faces finally at a height. “No,” he said.
他伸出手指抚她下巴，托起她的头，让她直视他的双眼。与她相比，卓戈明显高出一大截，他比所有人都高出一截。他轻轻地自腋下抱起她，把她放在溪边的圆石上。然后他坐在地上，面对她，双脚盘坐，两人的脸终于处在同样高度。“不。”他说。
“Is that the only word you know?” she asked him.
“你只知道这个字吗？”她问他。
Drogo did not reply. His long heavy braid was coiled in the dirt beside him. He pulled it over his right shoulder and began to remove the bells from his hair, one by one. After a moment Dany leaned forward to help. When they were done, Drogo gestured. She understood. Slowly, carefully, she began to undo his braid.
卓戈没有回答。他又长又重的辫子在身旁的泥土地上缠绕成圈。他将辫子拉过右肩，开始一个一个解下铃铛。过了一会儿，丹妮也靠过去帮他。全部完成之后，卓戈做了个手势。这次她看懂了，便小心翼翼地为他缓缓松开辫子。
It took a long time. All the while he sat there silently, watching her. When she was done, he shook his head, and his hair spread out behind him like a river of darkness, oiled and gleaming. She had never seen hair so long, so black, so thick.
她花了好长时间。在这期间，他始终静静地坐在原地，凝望着她。她完成之后，他甩甩头，乌黑油亮的头发便如一条黑暗的河流般在他身后泼洒开来。她从未见过这么长、这么黑、这么厚实的头发。
Then it was his turn. He began to undress her.
然后轮到他了。他开始为她宽衣解带。
His fingers were deft and strangely tender. He removed her silks one by one, carefully, while Dany sat unmoving, silent, looking at his eyes. When he bared her small breasts, she could not help herself. She averted her eyes and covered herself with her hands. “No,” Drogo said. He pulled her hands away from her breasts, gently but firmly, then lifted her face again to make her look at him. “No,” he repeated.
他的手指不仅灵敏、而且出奇温柔。他轻缓地为她脱去一件件丝质礼服，丹妮一动也不动地静静坐着，凝望他的双眸。当她小小的乳房暴露出来时，她实在克制不住，下意识地伸手遮挡，并将视线转开。“不。”卓戈说。他把她遮住胸部的手拿开，温柔而坚定，然后他再度抬起她的脸，让她看着他。“不。”他重复。
“No,” she echoed back at him.
“不。”她也跟着说。
He stood her up then and pulled her close to remove the last of her silks. The night air was chilly on her bare skin. She shivered, and gooseflesh covered her arms and legs. She was afraid of what would come next, but for a while nothing happened. Khal Drogo sat with his legs crossed, looking at her, drinking in her body with his eyes.
他扶她站起，将她拉近，为她除去身上最后一件丝衣。夜风寒冷，凉如冰水，吹在赤裸的肌肤上，令她不禁颤抖，手脚也冒出鸡皮疙瘩。她很害怕接下来会发生的事，但她等了好久，什么也没有发生。卓戈卡奥仍旧双腿盘坐，定定地望着她，用眼睛享受她的躯体。
After a while he began to touch her. Lightly at first, then harder. She could sense the fierce strength in his hands, but he never hurt her. He held her hand in his own and brushed her fingers, one by one. He ran a hand gently down her leg. He stroked her face, tracing the curve of her ears, running a finger gently around her mouth. He put both hands in her hair and combed it with his fingers. He turned her around, massaged her shoulders, slid a knuckle down the path of her spine.
又过了一会儿，他开始抚摸她。起初非常轻微，然后稍稍用力。她可以感觉出他手臂里蕴藏的力量，但他始终没有弄痛她。他握住她的手，抚弄她的指头，一根又一根。他爱抚她的脸颊，沿着耳朵的曲线，一根手指轻轻绕着她的嘴巴。他将双手伸进她的头发，用手指为她梳头，接着把她转过身去，按摩她的肩膀，指节沿着脊椎往下滑。
It seemed as if hours passed before his hands finally went to her breasts. He stroked the soft skin underneath until it tingled. He circled her nipples with his thumbs, pinched them between thumb and forefinger, then began to pull at her, very lightly at first, then more insistently, until her nipples stiffened and began to ache.
似乎又过了好久，他才将手伸向她的乳房。他抚摸着乳房下方的部位，直到她浑身发麻，又用拇指绕着乳头转，拿拇指和食指轻轻夹住，然后向外拉，起初非常轻微，随后渐渐加重，直到她乳头发硬，开始疼痛。
He stopped then, and drew her down onto his lap. Dany was flushed and breathless, her heart fluttering in her chest. He cupped her face in his huge hands and she looked into his eyes. “No?” he said, and she knew it was a question.
这时他停了下来，把她拉进怀里。丹妮面红耳赤，喘气不止，心脏狂跳。他用那双巨掌托起她的脸，两人四目相交。“不？”他说。她听懂这是个问句。
She took his hand and moved it down to the wetness between her thighs. “Yes,” she whispered as she put his finger inside her.
她握住他的手，引领它朝向她双腿间湿润的地方。“要。”她一边低语，一边导引他的手指进入她的体内。
*EDDARD
第十三章 艾德
T he summons came in the hour before the dawn, when the world was still and grey.
国王传唤他时，天还未亮，世界一片寂静，灰蒙蒙的。
Alyn shook him roughly from his dreams and Ned stumbled into the predawn chill, groggy from sleep, to find his horse saddled and the king already mounted. Robert wore thick brown gloves and a heavy fur cloak with a hood that covered his ears, and looked for all the world like a bear sitting a horse. “Up, Stark!” he roared. “Up, up! We have matters of state to discuss.”
埃林轻轻地将他自梦中摇醒，奈德睡意未消便踉跄着跌入曙光未露前的清晨，发现自己的坐骑已经鞍辔妥当，而国王本人早已骑乘马上。劳勃戴着棕色厚手套，身披厚重的套头毛皮斗篷，看起来活像只骑在马上的大熊。“史塔克，起床了！”他吼道，“还不快醒醒，咱们有国家大事要商量哪。”
“By all means,” Ned said. “Come inside, Your Grace.” Alyn lifted the flap of the tent.
“遵命，”奈德说，“陛下，请进帐。”埃林闻言掀起帘幕。
“No, no, no,” Robert said. His breath steamed with every word. “The camp is full of ears. Besides, I want to ride out and taste this country of yours.” Ser Boros and Ser Meryn waited behind him with a dozen guardsmen, Ned saw. There was nothing to do but rub the sleep from his eyes, dress, and mount up.
“不不不，”劳勃的呼吸在冷气里蒸腾：“营地里闲杂人等太多，只怕隔墙有耳。况且我想出去走走，顺便体验一下你的北地风光。”奈德这才瞧见柏洛斯爵士和马林爵士率领十数护卫跟在国王身后。看来除了揉揉惺忪睡眼，更衣上马之外，别无他法了。
Robert set the pace, driving his huge black destrier hard as Ned galloped along beside him, trying to keep up. He called out a question as they rode, but the wind blew his words away, and the king did not hear him. After that Ned rode in silence. They soon left the kingsroad and took off across rolling plains dark with mist. By then the guard had fallen back a small distance, safely out of earshot, but still Robert would not slow.
劳勃骑着他那匹黑色战马一路狂奔，奈德也只好跟上。他边骑边问了一句，但朔风吹散了他的话音，国王没有听见。之后奈德不再发话，只静静地骑马。他们旋即离开国王大道，奔进黑雾浓郁的辽阔平原。此时护卫已离他们有段距离，再听不见两人交谈，但劳勃仍未减速。
Dawn broke as they crested a low ridge, and finally the king pulled up. By then they were miles south of the main party. Robert was flushed and exhilarated as Ned reined up beside him. “Gods,” he swore, laughing, “it feels good to get out and ride the way a man was meant to ride! I swear, Ned, this creeping along is enough to drive a man mad.” He had never been a patient man, Robert Baratheon. “That damnable wheelhouse, the way it creaks and groans, climbing every bump in the road as if it were a mountain … I promise you, if that wretched thing breaks another axle, I’m going to burn it, and Cersei can walk!”
直到他们登上一道低缓山脊，晨曦初露，国王方才慢下脚步，此时他们已在营地南方数里之遥。奈德跟上劳勃，只见他满脸通红，神采飞扬。“妈的，”他笑着咒道，“到野外像个男人一样骑他妈一段可真痛快！我告诉你，奈德，那慢吞吞的牛步会把人给逼疯的。”劳勃·拜拉席恩向来不是个有耐性的人。“瞧那天杀的轮宫叽叽嘎嘎的呻吟模样，遇到石子都一副爬山的样子……那鬼东西敢再给我断根车轴，我保证放火烧了它，然后叫瑟曦跟着走路！”
Ned laughed. “I will gladly light the torch for you.”
奈德笑道：“那我很乐意为您点火。”
“Good man!” The king clapped him on the shoulder. “I’ve half a mind to leave them all behind and just keep going.”
“说得好！”国王拍拍他肩膀，“我还真想丢下他们，就这样骑下去呢。”
A smile touched Ned’s lips. “I do believe you mean it.”
一抹笑意浮上奈德嘴角。“我相信您是认真的。”
“I do, I do,” the king said. “What do you say, Ned? Just you and me, two vagabond knights on the kingsroad, our swords at our sides and the gods know what in front of us, and maybe a farmer’s daughter or a tavern wench to warm our beds tonight.”
“那当然，那当然。”国王道，“奈德，你觉得怎样？就咱两个游侠骑士仗剑闯江湖，兵来将挡，水来土淹。晚上便找个农夫女儿或是酒店侍女帮咱们温床。”
“Would that we could,” Ned said, “but we have duties now, my liege … to the realm, to our children, I to my lady wife and you to your queen. We are not the boys we were.”
“果真如此倒好，”奈德说，“但是陛下，如今我们有责任在身……不只是对整个王国，更要对我们的子女负责，何况我有我的夫人，您有您的王后，我们已经不再是当年的年轻小伙了。”
“You were never the boy you were,” Robert grumbled. “More’s the pity. And yet there was that one time … what was her name, that common girl of yours? Becca? No, she was one of mine, gods love her, black hair and these sweet big eyes, you could drown in them. Yours was … Aleena? No. You told me once. Was it Merryl? You know the one I mean, your bastard’s mother?”
“你小子从来也没年轻过，”劳勃咕哝，“也罢。不过有那么一回……你那小妞儿叫什么来着？蓓卡？不对，她是我的，老天保佑她，那头黑亮秀发和甜美的大眼睛，一不小心就教人难以自拔。你那个叫……雅莉娜？你跟我提过一次，还是叫梅莉儿？你知道我说的哪一个吧？就你私生子的娘。”
“Her name was Wylla,” Ned replied with cool courtesy, “and I would sooner not speak of her.”
“她叫薇拉。”奈德有礼却冷冷说，“我不想谈她。”
“Wylla. Yes.” The king grinned. “She must have been a rare wench if she could make Lord Eddard Stark forget his honor, even for an hour. You never told me what she looked like …”
“对，就叫薇拉。”劳勃嘿嘿直笑，“能让艾德·史塔克公爵暂时忘却荣誉，即使只是短短一个小时，她一定不是个简单的姑娘。你倒是一直没告诉我她生什么模样……？”
Ned’s mouth tightened in anger. “Nor will I. Leave it be, Robert, for the love you say you bear me. I dishonored myself and I dishonored Catelyn, in the sight of gods and men.”
奈德愤怒地抿嘴道：“以后也不会告诉你。劳勃，不要再说了，就算是看在我俩的情分上罢。我当着诸神和世人的面羞辱了我自己，也羞辱了凯特琳。”
“Gods have mercy, you scarcely knew Catelyn.”
“诸神在上，你那时根本就没跟凯特琳见几次面。”
“I had taken her to wife. She was carrying my child.”
“我已娶她为妻，她也怀了我的孩子。”
“You are too hard on yourself, Ned. You always were. Damn it, no woman wants Baelor the Blessed in her bed.” He slapped a hand on his knee. “Well, I’ll not press you if you feel so strong about it, though I swear, at times you’re so prickly you ought to take the hedgehog as your sigil.”
“奈德，你律己太严了。你老是这德行，他妈的，不会有女人想跟圣贝勒上床的。”他拍了拍膝盖，“算了，既然你不想说，我也不勉强。但有时候看你浑身带刺，我觉得你真该拿刺猬来当家徽。”
The rising sun sent fingers of light through the pale white mists of dawn. A wide plain spread out beneath them, bare and brown, its flatness here and there relieved by long, low hummocks. Ned pointed them out to his king. “The barrows of the First Men.”
东升旭日的金黄指头探进清晨的朦胧白雾，一片辽阔原野在两人眼前展开，其中除了长而低缓的零星小丘，尽是片片光秃秃的褐色平地。奈德指给国王看，“这里就是‘先民坟冢’。”
Robert frowned. “Have we ridden onto a graveyard?”
劳勃皱眉道：“我们骑到坟墓堆里来了吗？”
“There are barrows everywhere in the north, Your Grace,” Ned told him. “This land is old.”
“陛下，北方遍地都是坟墓啊。”奈德告诉他，“这是块古老的土地。”
“And cold,” Robert grumbled, pulling his cloak more tightly around himself. The guard had reined up well behind them, at the bottom of the ridge. “Well, I did not bring you out here to talk of graves or bicker about your bastard. There was a rider in the night, from Lord Varys in King’s Landing. Here.” The king pulled a paper from his belt and handed it to Ned.
“也是个冷死人的地方。”劳勃拉紧斗篷埋怨道，随从在他们后方停缰勒马，停在山脊上。“也罢，我把你找到这里可不是来讨论坟墓和你私生子的。昨晚瓦里斯伯爵差人从君临送了封信来，喏。”国王从腰带上抽出一张纸递给奈德。
Varys the eunuch was the king’s master of whisperers. He served Robert now as he had once served Aerys Targaryen. Ned unrolled the paper with trepidation, thinking of Lysa and her terrible accusation, but the message did not concern Lady Arryn. “What is the source for this information?”
太监瓦里斯是国王的情报总管，从前服侍伊里斯·坦格利安，如今改事劳勃。奈德畏惧地打开卷轴，心里想起莱莎和她那骇人的控诉，所幸内容与艾林夫人无关。“这消息的来源是？”
“Do you remember Ser Jorah Mormont?”
“你还记得乔拉·莫尔蒙爵士吗？”
“Would that I might forget him,” Ned said bluntly. The Mormonts of Bear Island were an old house, proud and honorable, but their lands were cold and distant and poor. Ser Jorah had tried to swell the family coffers by selling some poachers to a Tyroshi slaver. As the Mormonts were bannermen to the Starks, his crime had dishonored the north. Ned had made the long journey west to Bear Island, only to find when he arrived that Jorah had taken ship beyond the reach of Ice and the king’s justice. Five years had passed since then.
“我一辈子也忘不了那家伙。”奈德脱口便道。熊岛的莫尔蒙家族历史悠久，骄傲而讲究荣誉，但他们的领地位置偏远，酷寒贫瘠。
“Ser Jorah is now in Pentos, anxious to earn a royal pardon that would allow him to return from exile,” Robert explained. “Lord Varys makes good use of him.”
乔拉爵士为增加收入，打算把抓到的盗猎者卖给泰洛西的奴隶贩子。由于莫尔蒙是史塔克的封臣，如此一来等于玷污了整个北方的名声。于是奈德千里迢迢西行前往熊岛，却发现乔拉早已搭船潜逃，逃到“寒冰”和国王的法律制裁之外的番邦异地去了。事发至今一转眼已经五年。
“So the slaver has become a spy,” Ned said with distaste. He handed the letter back. “I would rather he become a corpse.”
“乔拉爵士现下人在潘托斯，正焦急地等着王家特赦好渡海回国。”劳勃解释，“瓦里斯伯爵妥善运用了这个优势。”
“Varys tells me that spies are more useful than corpses,” Robert said. “Jorah aside, what do you make of his report?”
“人口贩子这下又成了间谍？”奈德嫌恶地说，一边把信件交还。“我倒是宁愿他变成一具尸体。”
“Daenerys Targaryen has wed some Dothraki horselord. What of it? Shall we send her a wedding gift?”
“瓦里斯认为间谍比尸体有用得多，”劳勃道，“不过撇开乔拉不谈，你对此事有何看法？”
The king frowned. “A knife, perhaps. A good sharp one, and a bold man to wield it.”
“丹妮莉丝嫁给一个多斯拉克马王，那又如何？难不成我们该送份结婚贺礼过去？”
Ned did not feign surprise; Robert’s hatred of the Targaryens was a madness in him. He remembered the angry words they had exchanged when Tywin Lannister had presented Robert with the corpses of Rhaegar’s wife and children as a token of fealty. Ned had named that murder; Robert called it war. When he had protested that the young prince and princess were no more than babes, his new-made king had replied, “I see no babes. Only dragonspawn.” Not even Jon Arryn had been able to calm that storm. Eddard Stark had ridden out that very day in a cold rage, to fight the last battles of the war alone in the south. It had taken another death to reconcile them; Lyanna’s death, and the grief they had shared over her passing.
国王皱眉：“我看送把刀更好。一把锐利的好刀，拿在一个有胆量的人手里。”
This time, Ned resolved to keep his temper. “Your Grace, the girl is scarcely more than a child. You are no Tywin Lannister, to slaughter innocents.” It was said that Rhaegar’s little girl had cried as they dragged her from beneath her bed to face the swords. The boy had been no more than a babe in arms, yet Lord Tywin’s soldiers had torn him from his mother’s breast and dashed his head against a wall.
奈德没有故作惊讶。劳勃对坦格利安家族的恨意几近疯狂，他至今都还记忆犹新，当年泰温·兰尼斯特献上雷加妻儿们的尸体以示效忠时，两人所发生的激烈口角。奈德认为这是谋杀，劳勃却说是战争中难免的惨剧。当他辩称年幼的王子和公主与婴儿无异时，甫登上王位的劳勃应道：“我可没看到什么婴儿，只见到恶龙的孽种。”就连琼恩·艾林也无法平息那场纷争。艾德·史塔克当天便愤然拂袖而去，独自领兵前往南方打最后的一场仗。后来是因为莱安娜的死，两人才言归于好。
“And how long will this one remain an innocent?” Robert’s mouth grew hard. “This child will soon enough spread her legs and start breeding more dragonspawn to plague me.”
但这次奈德没有发火。“陛下，她不过是个孩子，您总不会像泰温·兰尼斯特那样滥杀无辜罢？”据说他们把雷加的小女儿从床上硬拖出去受死的时候，她哭得泪眼汪汪。他的儿子根本只是个襁褓中的婴儿，但泰温公爵的手下照样把他从母亲胸膛上扯开来，一头撞死在墙上。
“Nonetheless,” Ned said, “the murder of children … it would be vile … unspeakable …”
“谁知道她还能天真无邪多久？”劳勃语音渐扬，“这个‘孩子’过不了多久就会张开双腿，繁殖一堆恶龙遗毒来找我麻烦了。”
“Unspeakable?” the king roared. “What Aerys did to your brother Brandon was unspeakable. The way your lord father died, that was unspeakable. And Rhaegar … how many times do you think he raped your sister? How many hundreds of times?” His voice had grown so loud that his horse whinnied nervously beneath him. The king jerked the reins hard, quieting the animal, and pointed an angry finger at Ned. “I will kill every Targaryen I can get my hands on, until they are as dead as their dragons, and then I will piss on their graves.”
“话虽如此，”奈德道，“但谋杀孩子却是很……令人发指……”
Ned knew better than to defy him when the wrath was on him. If the years had not quenched Robert’s thirst for revenge, no words of his would help. “You can’t get your hands on this one, can you?” he said quietly.
“令人发指？”国王一声怒喝，“伊里斯对你哥哥布兰登干的那些事，那才叫令人发指。想想你先父如何惨死，那才叫令人发指。还有雷加……你觉得他强暴了你妹妹几次？干了她几百次？”他的暴跳使得鞍下坐骑不安地嘶叫起来，国王猛地一扯缰绳，教马儿安静，然后愤怒地指着奈德，“我要亲手宰掉每一个坦格利安家的人，斩尽杀绝；我要教他们像龙一样死得干净彻底，最后在他们坟上撒尿。”
The king’s mouth twisted in a bitter grimace. “No, gods be cursed. Some pox-ridden Pentoshi cheesemonger had her brother and her walled up on his estate with pointy-hatted eunuchs all around them, and now he’s handed them over to the Dothraki. I should have had them both killed years ago, when it was easy to get at them, but Jon was as bad as you. More fool I, I listened to him.”
奈德很清楚不能在国王气头上顶撞他。如果这么多年的时间都无法浇熄他复仇的烈焰，只怕他的话也起不了什么作用。“你没法亲手宰掉这一个，对吧？”他轻声说。
“Jon Arryn was a wise man and a good Hand.”
国王愤恨地撇撇嘴。“是没办法，天杀的。有个操他妈的潘托斯小贩把他们兄妹俩藏在围墙后面，还派了一堆尖帽子太监看守，这会儿又把他们卖给多斯拉克人。几年前不容易杀他们的时候，我早该动手了，但琼恩跟你一样坏心眼。不过我更傻，我听了他的话。”
Robert snorted. The anger was leaving him as suddenly as it had come. “This Khal Drogo is said to have a hundred thousand men in his horde. What would Jon say to that?”
“琼恩·艾林是个英明睿智的首相。”
“He would say that even a million Dothraki are no threat to the realm, so long as they remain on the other side of the narrow sea,” Ned replied calmly. “The barbarians have no ships . They hate and fear the open sea.”
劳勃哼了一声。“传说这个卓戈卡奥手下有十万大军，琼恩听了会作何感想？”
The king shifted uncomfortably in his saddle. “Perhaps. There are ships to be had in the Free Cities, though. I tell you, Ned, I do not like this marriage. There are still those in the Seven Kingdoms who call me Usurper. Do you forget how many houses fought for Targaryen in the war? They bide their time for now, but give them half a chance, they will murder me in my bed, and my sons with me. If the beggar king crosses with a Dothraki horde at his back, the traitors will join him.”
“他会说只要多斯拉克人待在狭海对岸，即便百万大军又有何惧？”奈德平静地答道，“那些野蛮人没有船，他们对一望无际的汪洋又惧又怕。”
“He will not cross,” Ned promised. “And if by some mischance he does, we will throw him back into the sea. Once you choose a new Warden of the East—”
国王不安地在马鞍上挪了挪。“或许如此，不过自由贸易城邦有的是船。奈德，我老实告诉你，我一点也不喜欢这桩婚事。到现在王国里还有人叫我‘篡夺者’，你难道忘了当年有多少豪门望族起兵为坦格利安家族而战吗？他们现在按兵不动，但要是逮着机会，等不及要取我和我儿子的性命哪！倘若哪天这乞丐国王带着多斯拉克大军渡海而来，这些叛徒一定会拥护他。”
The king groaned. “For the last time, I will not name the Arryn boy Warden. I know the boy is your nephew, but with Targaryens climbing in bed with Dothraki, I would be mad to rest one quarter of the realm on the shoulders of a sickly child.”
“他渡不了海的。”奈德保证，“就算他真来了，我们也能协力把他赶回去。等你任命好新的东境守护——”
Ned was ready for that. “Yet we still must have a Warden of the East. If Robert Arryn will not do, name one of your brothers. Stannis proved himself at the siege of Storm’s End, surely.”
国王呻吟道：“我说最后一遍，我不会让艾林家那小毛头继任东境守护。我知道那孩子是你外甥，但现在坦格利安家和多斯拉克人上了床，我疯了才会把统领王国四分之一军队的重任交给一个体弱多病的小男孩来扛。”
He let the name hang there for a moment. The king frowned and said nothing. He looked uncomfortable.
奈德早知他会有此答复。“但必须有人出来担任东境守护不可。假如劳勃·艾林不足以胜任，那就让你的兄弟之一来接手罢。史坦尼斯在风息堡之围一役中已经展现出他的才能，相信他应该没问题。”
“That is,” Ned finished quietly, watching, “unless you have already promised the honor to another.”
他让史坦尼斯的名字在空气中悬宕了一会儿，国王皱皱眉，没有答腔，看起来不太舒服。
For a moment Robert had the grace to look startled. Just as quickly, the look became annoyance. “What if I have?”
“当然，”奈德轻声续道，静观其变。“倘若你已把这个职位许给了别人，那就另当别论。”
“It’s Jaime Lannister, is it not?”
起初劳勃露出吃惊的神色，但随即转为不悦：“假如真是这样呢？”
Robert kicked his horse back into motion and started down the ridge toward the barrows. Ned kept pace with him. The king rode on, eyes straight ahead. “Yes,” he said at last. A single hard word to end the matter.
“詹姆·兰尼斯特，对吧？”
“Kingslayer,” Ned said. The rumors were true, then. He rode on dangerous ground now, he knew. “An able and courageous man, no doubt,” he said carefully, “but his father is Warden of the West, Robert. In time Ser Jaime will succeed to that honor. No one man should hold both East and West.” He left unsaid his real concern; that the appointment would put half the armies of the realm into the hands of Lannisters.
劳勃一夹马肚，朝山瘠下的荒冢驰去，奈德紧随在旁。国王径自骑行，两眼直视前方。“对。”最后他总算开了口，仿佛要用这一个字来结束议题。
“I will fight that battle when the enemy appears on the field,” the king said stubbornly. “At the moment, Lord Tywin looms eternal as Casterly Rock, so I doubt that Jaime will be succeeding anytime soon. Don’t vex me about this, Ned, the stone has been set.”
“弑君者。”奈德道。这么说来，所有的谣言都属实了。他很清楚自己此刻措辞务必小心谨慎。“他有能力，也不缺勇气，这毋庸置疑。”他小心翼翼地说，“但是劳勃，他父亲是世袭的西境守护，詹姆爵士迟早要继承父职，东西诸国的大权不应落入同一个人手里。”他没把真正想说的话说出来：如此一来王国一半的兵力将会落入兰尼斯特家族的手中。
“Your Grace, may I speak frankly?”
“等敌人出现了再打也不迟，”国王执拗地说，“眼下泰温公爵好端端地待在凯岩城，我想詹姆还不至于太快继承职位。奈德，这事儿别跟我争，说出去的话，覆水难收了。”
“I seem unable to stop you,” Robert grumbled. They rode through tall brown grasses.
“陛下，请恕我直言不讳。”
“Can you trust Jaime Lannister?”
“反正我也阻止不了你。”劳勃咕哝着。他们骑过棕褐长草。
“He is my wife’s twin, a Sworn Brother of the Kingsguard, his life and fortune and honor all bound to mine.”
“你真信任詹姆·兰尼斯特？”
“As they were bound to Aerys Targaryen’s,” Ned pointed out.
“他是我老婆的孪生弟弟，又是发过誓的御林铁卫，他的生死荣辱都维系在我身上。”
“Why should I mistrust him? He has done everything I have ever asked of him. His sword helped win the throne I sit on.”
“当年他的生死荣辱不也全维系在伊里斯·坦格利安身上？”奈德不客气地指出。
His sword helped taint the throne you sit on , Ned thought, but he did not permit the words to pass his lips. “He swore a vow to protect his king’s life with his own. Then he opened that king’s throat with a sword.”
“我有什么理由不信任他？我叫他办的事他没有一次让我失望，就连我现在的王位都是靠他的宝剑赢来的咧。”
“Seven hells, someone had to kill Aerys!” Robert said, reining his mount to a sudden halt beside an ancient barrow. “If Jaime hadn’t done it, it would have been left for you or me.”
正是他的宝剑玷污了你的王位啊，奈德心想，但没让自己说出口。“他发誓以性命守护国王，结果却一剑割了国王的喉咙。”
“We were not Sworn Brothers of the Kingsguard,” Ned said. The time had come for Robert to hear the whole truth, he decided then and there. “Do you remember the Trident, Your Grace?”
“妈的，总得有人动手吧？”劳勃道，他在一座古老的荒坟边勒住马缰。“要是他没杀掉伊里斯，那么不是你杀就是我杀。”
“I won my crown there. How should I forget it?”
“我们可不是宣誓效死的御林铁卫。”奈德道，当下他决定是该让劳勃听听实话的时候了。“陛下，您可还记得三叉戟河之战？”
“You took a wound from Rhaegar,” Ned reminded him. “So when the Targaryen host broke and ran, you gave the pursuit into my hands. The remnants of Rhaegar’s army fled back to King’s Landing. We followed. Aerys was in the Red Keep with several thousand loyalists. I expected to find the gates closed to us.”
“我头上的王冠就是在那儿挣来的，怎么可能忘记？”
Robert gave an impatient shake of his head. “Instead you found that our men had already taken the city. What of it?”
“您在和雷加的决斗中负了伤，”奈德提醒他，“因此当坦格利安军溃散后，您将追击的任务托付于我。雷加的残兵逃回君临，我们尾随而至。伊里斯和几千名死士守在红堡，我本以为城门一定是紧紧关闭。”
“Not our men,” Ned said patiently. “Lannister men. The lion of Lannister flew over the ramparts, not the crowned stag. And they had taken the city by treachery.”
劳勃不耐烦地摇头接口：“结果你发现我们的人已经占领了城堡，那又如何？”
The war had raged for close to a year. Lords great and small had flocked to Robert’s banners; others had remained loyal to Targaryen. The mighty Lannisters of Casterly Rock, the Wardens of the West, had remained aloof from the struggle, ignoring calls to arms from both rebels and royalists. Aerys Targaryen must have thought that his gods had answered his prayers when Lord Tywin Lannister appeared before the gates of King’s Landing with an army twelve thousand strong, professing loyalty. So the mad king had ordered his last mad act. He had opened his city to the lions at the gate.
“不是我们的人，”奈德耐着性子，“是兰尼斯特家的人。当时城垛上飘扬的是兰尼斯特家族的怒吼雄狮，并非宝冠雄鹿。城池乃是他们靠诡计夺下的。”
“Treachery was a coin the Targaryens knew well,” Robert said. The anger was building in him again. “Lannister paid them back in kind. It was no less than they deserved. I shall not trouble my sleep over it.”
当时战火已经蔓烧将近一年，大小贵族纷纷投至劳勃旗下，也有不少仍旧忠于坦格利安家族。势力庞大，世代担任西境守护的凯岩城兰尼斯特家族，却始终远离战场，不理会叛党和保王人士的呼唤。最后，当泰温·兰尼斯特公爵亲率一万两千精兵出现在君临城下，表示勤王意图时，伊里斯·坦格利安想必以为自己命不该绝罢。于是疯狂的国王下了他最后一道疯狂的命令，大开城门，引狮入室。
“You were not there,” Ned said, bitterness in his voice. Troubled sleep was no stranger to him. He had lived his lies for fourteen years, yet they still haunted him at night. “There was no honor in that conquest.”
“坦格利安同样也与诡计为伍，”劳勃道，他的怒气又渐渐升起。“兰尼斯特不过是以其人之道，还治其人之身罢了。天要亡坦格利安，他们死不足惜。”
“The Others take your honor!” Robert swore. “What did any Targaryen ever know of honor? Go down into your crypt and ask Lyanna about the dragon’s honor!”
“你当时并不在场，”奈德语带苦涩。这个谎言已经伴随他十四年，至今仍时常在梦中骚扰他。“那场仗毫无荣誉可言。”
“You avenged Lyanna at the Trident,” Ned said, halting beside the king. Promise me, Ned , she had whispered.
“去你妈的荣誉！”劳勃破口大骂，“坦格利安懂什么狗屁荣誉？去你老家墓窖里问问莱安娜，问她什么叫恶龙的荣誉！”
“That did not bring her back.” Robert looked away, off into the grey distance. “The gods be damned. It was a hollow victory they gave me. A crown … it was the girl I prayed them for. Your sister, safe … and mine again, as she was meant to be. I ask you, Ned, what good is it to wear a crown? The gods mock the prayers of kings and cowherds alike.”
“三叉戟河一役，你已经为她报了仇。”奈德在国王身旁停下马。奈德，答应我，当年，她死前如此低语。
“I cannot answer for the gods, Your Grace … only for what I found when I rode into the throne room that day,” Ned said. “Aerys was dead on the floor, drowned in his own blood. His dragon skulls stared down from the walls. Lannister’s men were everywhere. Jaime wore the white cloak of the Kingsguard over his golden armor. I can see him still. Even his sword was gilded. He was seated on the Iron Throne, high above his knights, wearing a helm fashioned in the shape of a lion’s head. How he glittered!”
“却不能让她起死回生，”劳勃别转头去，望向灰暗的远方。“诸神都该死，我只求得到你妹妹，他们却硬塞给我一顶狗屁王冠……赢得战争又如何？我只要她平平安安……重回我的怀抱，一切都和原本一样。奈德，我问你，当国王有什么好？管你是国王还是放牛郎，诸神不都一样嘲弄你么？”
“This is well known,” the king complained.
“陛下，我没法替神灵回答您的问题……我只知道当我骑马进入红堡大厅时，”奈德道，“伊里斯倒卧血泊，墙上龙骨冷冷地看着他。四处都是兰尼斯特的手下，詹姆穿着亮金战甲，外罩御林铁卫的白披风，还有金色的宝剑，那景象直到现在还历历在目。他坐在铁王座上，高耸于众武士之中，狮头面罩下，威风凛凛，好不意气风发！”
“I was still mounted. I rode the length of the hall in silence, between the long rows of dragon skulls. It felt as though they were watching me, somehow. I stopped in front of the throne, looking up at him. His golden sword was across his legs, its edge red with a king’s blood. My men were filling the room behind me. Lannister’s men drew back. I never said a word. I looked at him seated there on the throne, and I waited. At last Jaime laughed and got up. He took off his helm, and he said to me, ‘Have no fear, Stark. I was only keeping it warm for our friend Robert. It’s not a very comfortable seat, I’m afraid.’”
“这是众人皆知的事嘛！”国王抱怨。
The king threw back his head and roared. His laughter startled a flight of crows from the tall brown grass. They took to the air in a wild beating of wings. “You think I should mistrust Lannister because he sat on my throne for a few moments?” He shook with laughter again. “Jaime was all of seventeen, Ned. Scarce more than a boy.”
“当时我人在马上，骑进正殿，穿过一排排巨龙颅骨，我有种感觉，仿佛他们正看着我。最后我停在王座之前，抬头望他。他把黄金宝剑横陈于大腿之上，国王的血从剑尖不断滴落。这时我的人也涌进大厅，兰尼斯特的部队则不断后退。我半个字也没说，只静静地盯着他坐在王位上的模样，耐心等待。最后他笑着站起来，摘下头盔对我说：‘史塔克，可别瞎担心哟，我只是先帮咱们劳勃暖暖位子罢了。不过这把椅子恐怕坐起来不大舒服哪！’”
“Boy or man, he had no right to that throne.”
国王仰头大笑，笑声惊起栖息在附近棕褐长草丛里的乌鸦群，它们嘎嘎惊叫，振翅腾空。“只因为兰尼斯特那小子在我的王位上坐了几分钟，你就叫我别信任他？”他再度放声狂笑，“得了罢，奈德，詹姆当年才十七岁，还是个大孩子。”
“Perhaps he was tired,” Robert suggested. “Killing kings is weary work. Gods know, there’s no place else to rest your ass in that damnable room. And he spoke truly, it is a monstrous uncomfortable chair. In more ways than one.” The king shook his head. “Well, now I know Jaime’s dark sin, and the matter can be forgotten. I am heartily sick of secrets and squabbles and matters of state, Ned. It’s all as tedious as counting coppers. Come, let’s ride, you used to know how. I want to feel the wind in my hair again.” He kicked his horse back into motion and galloped up over the barrow, raining earth down behind him.
“不管他是孩子还是成人，都无权坐上王位。”
For a moment Ned did not follow. He had run out of words, and he was filled with a vast sense of helplessness. Not for the first time, he wondered what he was doing here and why he had come. He was no Jon Arryn, to curb the wildness of his king and teach him wisdom. Robert would do what he pleased, as he always had, and nothing Ned could say or do would change that. He belonged in Winterfell. He belonged with Catelyn in her grief, and with Bran.
“或许他累了，”劳勃帮他开脱：“杀国王可不是件轻松差事，那该死的大厅里又没别的地方摆屁股。其实，他说的一点不错，不管从哪方面来看，那都是张既狰狞又不舒服的椅子。”国王摇摇头，“好了，如今我知道詹姆不为人知的恶行了，以后就忘了此事。奈德，我对管理国政和机心巧诈实在反胃透顶，全是些跟数铜板没两样的无聊事。来，咱们来好好骑上一段，你从前可是很会骑马的，咱们再尝尝大风在发梢奔驰的爽劲儿。”说完他再度策马前驱，扬长而去，越过坟冢，马蹄在身后溅起如雨泥花。
A man could not always be where he belonged, though. Resigned, Eddard Stark put his boots into his horse and set off after the king.
奈德并未立即跟上。他已经费尽唇舌，此刻只觉得心中充满无边的无助感。他不止一次地质疑自己到底在做什么，走这一遭又究竟所为何事。他不是琼恩·艾林，无法约束国王的野性，教导他以智慧。劳勃终究会任性而为，一如既往，奈德不论好说歹说都改变不了事实。他的归宿是临冬城，是哀伤的凯特琳，是他的爱子布兰啊。
*TYRION
但凡事毕竟不可能尽如人意。艾德·史塔克心意已决，便一踢马肚，朝国王奔去。
T he north went on forever.
第十四章 提利昂
Tyrion Lannister knew the maps as well as anyone, but a fortnight on the wild track that passed for the kingsroad up here had brought home the lesson that the map was one thing and the land quite another.
北境漫漫，一望无涯。
They had left Winterfell on the same day as the king, amidst all the commotion of the royal departure, riding out to the sound of men shouting and horses snorting, to the rattle of wagons and the groaning of the queen’s huge wheelhouse, as a light snow flurried about them. The kingsroad was just beyond the sprawl of castle and town. There the banners and the wagons and the columns of knights and freeriders turned south, taking the tumult with them, while Tyrion turned north with Benjen Stark and his nephew.
提利昂·兰尼斯特虽然熟读地图，但经过两周以来的一径北行，他深切体会到地图上说的是一回事，实际上却另有蹊跷。
It had grown colder after that, and far more quiet.
他们和国王的队伍于同一天离开临冬城，冒着细雪，穿过那一片人声马嘶、马车嘎吱和王后轮宫的呻吟。国王大道紧邻着主堡和城下市镇。国王的旗帜与车队，骑士和自由骑手就在该处转向南行，提利昂则与班扬·史塔克和琼恩叔侄二人往北走。
West of the road were flint hills, grey and rugged, with tall watchtowers on their stony summits. To the east the land was lower, the ground flattening to a rolling plain that stretched away as far as the eye could see. Stone bridges spanned swift, narrow rivers, while small farms spread in rings around holdfasts walled in wood and stone. The road was well trafficked, and at night for their comfort there were rude inns to be found.
在那之后，天气越趋凄冷，四周更显沉寂。
Three days ride from Winterfell, however, the farmland gave way to dense wood, and the kingsroad grew lonely. The flint hills rose higher and wilder with each passing mile, until by the fifth day they had turned into mountains, cold blue-grey giants with jagged promontories and snow on their shoulders. When the wind blew from the north, long plumes of ice crystals flew from the high peaks like banners.
国王大道逐渐变成一条比森林小路大不了多少的小径。道路西边是崎岖的灰岩丘陵，矮丘顶高耸着一座座守望台。东边则地势低缓，平坦旷野无限伸展，直至极目尽头。石桥跨越汹涌的狭窄激流，农场围绕石墙木梁的聚落。路上来往颇为频繁，日落后极易找到歇脚旅店。
With the mountains a wall to the west, the road veered north by northeast through the wood, a forest of oak and evergreen and black brier that seemed older and darker than any Tyrion had ever seen. “The wolfswood,” Benjen Stark called it, and indeed their nights came alive with the howls of distant packs, and some not so distant. Jon Snow’s albino direwolf pricked up his ears at the nightly howling, but never raised his own voice in reply. There was something very unsettling about that animal, Tyrion thought.
然而好景不长，离开临冬城三日之后，农田退去，只见茂密深林，国王大道也越来越人迹罕至。丘陵则日益陡峭，到了第五天，已经成了山脉，宛如肩负陈雪和陡峭岩峰的灰蓝巨人。当北风吹起，长长的冰针像旗帜一般从高耸的峰峦间飞溅而下。
There were eight in the party by then, not counting the wolf. Tyrion traveled with two of his own men, as befit a Lannister. Benjen Stark had only his bastard nephew and some fresh mounts for the Night’s Watch, but at the edge of the wolfswood they stayed a night behind the wooden walls of a forest holdfast, and there joined up with another of the black brothers, one Yoren. Yoren was stooped and sinister, his features hidden behind a beard as black as his clothing, but he seemed as tough as an old root and as hard as stone. With him were a pair of ragged peasant boys from the Fingers. “Rapers,” Yoren said with a cold look at his charges. Tyrion understood. Life on the Wall was said to be hard, but no doubt it was preferable to castration.
山在西方，路往东北，蜿蜒穿过树林。班扬·史塔克称这座满是橡树、常青树和黑荆棘，看起来比提利昂所见过任何林子都要古老的森林为“狼林”，每到夜晚，森林里也确实传来远方狼群此起彼落的嚎叫，有时离他们还不甚远。雪诺的白子冰原狼听到便会竖起耳朵，却从不应和。提利昂总觉得那只东西有种令人极端不安的感觉。
Five men, three boys, a direwolf, twenty horses, and a cage of ravens given over to Benjen Stark by Maester Luwin. No doubt they made a curious fellowship for the kingsroad, or any road.
扣除小狼不算，他们一行八人。首先提利昂依照兰尼斯特家的排场，带了两个随从。班扬·史塔克则只带着他的私生子侄儿，还有守夜人部队的一些牲口。但当他们在狼林边缘一栋木造庄园过夜时，又有一位叫尤伦的黑衣弟兄加入他们。这个尤伦驼着背，模样颇为阴狠，五官都躲在他那跟制服一般黑的胡子后面，但不难看出他是条汉子。他带了两个来自五指半岛，衣着破烂的农家子弟。“强奸犯。”尤伦冷冷地看着他们说。提利昂顿时领悟，长城上的日子虽然艰苦，但总比阉刑好得多。
Tyrion noticed Jon Snow watching Yoren and his sullen companions, with an odd cast to his face that looked uncomfortably like dismay. Yoren had a twisted shoulder and a sour smell, his hair and beard were matted and greasy and full of lice, his clothing old, patched, and seldom washed. His two young recruits smelled even worse, and seemed as stupid as they were cruel.
五个男人，三个孩子，一只冰原狼，二十匹马，还有一笼鲁温学士托班扬·史塔克捎带的大乌鸦，这样的一支队伍，想必是幅相当怪异的景象。
No doubt the boy had made the mistake of thinking that the Night’s Watch was made up of men like his uncle. If so, Yoren and his companions were a rude awakening. Tyrion felt sorry for the boy. He had chosen a hard life … or perhaps he should say that a hard life had been chosen for him.
提利昂注意到琼恩·雪诺一路不住打量尤伦和他那两名阴郁伙伴，脸上挂着古怪的表情，似乎有些困恼。尤伦不仅驼背，而且浑身酸臭，须发油腻，虱蚤丛生又衣衫破烂，遍布补丁且甚少清洗。他的两名手下味道更难闻，人则既愚蠢又残忍。
He had rather less sympathy for the uncle. Benjen Stark seemed to share his brother’s distaste for Lannisters, and he had not been pleased when Tyrion had told him of his intentions. “I warn you, Lannister, you’ll find no inns at the Wall,” he had said, looking down on him.
看来那孩子误以为守夜人军团里全是他叔叔这种人了。倘若他真这么想，那么尤伦一帮人对他可算是个错愕的觉醒。提利昂为那孩子难过，他选择的是一条艰难的道路……或者应该说，别人为他选择了这条艰难的道路。
“No doubt you’ll find some place to put me,” Tyrion had replied. “As you might have noticed, I’m small.”
他对孩子的叔叔可没这般好感。班扬·史塔克似乎和他哥哥一样讨厌兰尼斯特家的人，先前当提利昂表示想要同行时，他的反应相当不悦：“兰尼斯特，我话说在前头，长城没旅馆可住的。”他高高在上地盯着他。
One did not say no to the queen’s brother, of course, so that had settled the matter, but Stark had not been happy. “You will not like the ride, I promise you that,” he’d said curtly, and since the moment they set out, he had done all he could to live up to that promise.
“你总有办法安顿我罢，”提利昂答道，“你也看到了，我个子很小。”
By the end of the first week, Tyrion’s thighs were raw from hard riding, his legs were cramping badly, and he was chilled to the bone. He did not complain. He was damned if he would give Benjen Stark that satisfaction.
当然，没人敢对王后的弟弟说不，所以事情就算这么定了，但班扬依旧很不高兴。“我保证你不会喜欢这趟旅程。”他很不客气地回敬，而自队伍出发以来，他也果真尽其所能让此话成真。
He took a small revenge in the matter of his riding fur, a tattered bearskin, old and musty-smelling. Stark had offered it to him in an excess of Night’s Watch gallantry, no doubt expecting him to graciously decline. Tyrion had accepted with a smile. He had brought his warmest clothing with him when they rode out of Winterfell, and soon discovered that it was nowhere near warm enough. It was cold up here, and growing colder. The nights were well below freezing now, and when the wind blew it was like a knife cutting right through his warmest woolens. By now Stark was no doubt regretting his chivalrous impulse. Perhaps he had learned a lesson. The Lannisters never declined, graciously or otherwise. The Lannisters took what was offered.
提利昂倒是在御寒皮衣上扳回一城，原本史塔克故作殷勤地献上一件满溢腥羶，老旧破烂的熊皮，以表现守夜人的济弱扶贫，显然希望他会碍于礼数婉拒，但提利昂微笑着收下。离开临冬城的时候，他带上了所有最暖和的衣服，随即却发现根本不够。这里真是冷得吓人，而且气温还在不断下降。夜里的温度早已降至冰点以下，每当朔风吹起，便如尖刀般割进他最暖和的羊皮衣。想必史塔克此时正为自己一时兴起的骑士精神后悔吧。也许他会从中学到教训：兰尼斯特家人来者不拒，管他什么礼数，只要别人给，我就敢拿。
Farms and holdfasts grew scarcer and smaller as they pressed northward, ever deeper into the darkness of the wolfswood, until finally there were no more roofs to shelter under, and they were thrown back on their own resources.
越往北行，愈加深入狼林的幽暗国度，农庄田舍便更见疏落，终至人迹绝响，骤然遗世独立。
Tyrion was never much use in making a camp or breaking one. Too small, too hobbled, too in-the-way. So while Stark and Yoren and the other men erected rude shelters, tended the horses, and built a fire, it became his custom to take his fur and a wineskin and go off by himself to read.
无论扎营拔营，提利昂都帮不上忙。他个子太小，蹒跚跛行只会碍手碍脚。于是他便趁史塔克和尤伦等人搭建帐篷居所，照料马匹，生火取暖之际，裹紧皮衣，揣着酒袋，蹒跚到一边独自读书，这成了他的习惯。
On the eighteenth night of their journey, the wine was a rare sweet amber from the Summer Isles that he had brought all the way north from Casterly Rock, and the book a rumination on the history and properties of dragons. With Lord Eddard Stark’s permission, Tyrion had borrowed a few rare volumes from the Winterfell library and packed them for the ride north.
旅行的第十八天，他带着从凯岩城一路携来北方，盛夏群岛酿产的珍贵琥珀甜酒，以及相关龙族佚闻事迹的书——这几册珍贵的典籍乃是提利昂求得艾德·史塔克公爵允许，从临冬城的图书馆拿的——独自走开。
He found a comfortable spot just beyond the noise of the camp, beside a swift-running stream with waters clear and cold as ice. A grotesquely ancient oak provided shelter from the biting wind. Tyrion curled up in his fur with his back against the trunk, took a sip of the wine, and began to read about the properties of dragonbone. Dragonbone is black because of its high iron content , the book told him. It is strong as steel, yet lighter and far more flexible, and of course utterly impervious to fire. Dragonbone bows are greatly prized by the Dothraki, and small wonder. An archer so armed can outrange any wooden bow .
他走到营地的喧嚣之外，激流奔涌、水冷如冰的溪边觅得一方宁静。一株形体怪诞的老橡树恰好为他遮挡寒风。提利昂背靠树干，扯紧皮毛，啜了一口酒后读起关于龙骨的叙述。龙骨含铁量高，故呈黑色，书上如是说，龙骨坚硬如铁，然材质极轻且有韧性，自然亦不怕火。无怪乎多斯拉克人视龙骨弓为稀世珍宝，配上龙骨弓，射手可以轻易超越木制弓箭的射程。
Tyrion had a morbid fascination with dragons. When he had first come to King’s Landing for his sister’s wedding to Robert Baratheon, he had made it a point to seek out the dragon skulls that had hung on the walls of Targaryen’s throne room. King Robert had replaced them with banners and tapestries, but Tyrion had persisted until he found the skulls in the dank cellar where they had been stored.
提利昂对龙有种病态的迷恋。当年他初次造访君临，参加姐姐和劳勃·拜拉席恩的婚礼时，就打定主意一定要瞧瞧那些悬挂在坦格利安王座厅墙上的龙头。虽然劳勃国王早已把龙头换成了旗帜和壁毡，提利昂仍不死心，最后总算在阴湿的地窖内找到了它们的收藏处所。
He had expected to find them impressive, perhaps even frightening. He had not thought to find them beautiful. Yet they were. As black as onyx, polished smooth, so the bone seemed to shimmer in the light of his torch. They liked the fire, he sensed. He’d thrust the torch into the mouth of one of the larger skulls and made the shadows leap and dance on the wall behind him. The teeth were long, curving knives of black diamond. The flame of the torch was nothing to them; they had bathed in the heat of far greater fires. When he had moved away, Tyrion could have sworn that the beast’s empty eye sockets had watched him go.
他本以为龙头必定令人叹为观止，甚至叫人望而生畏，却怎么也想不到它们竟会是如此美丽的东西。它们的的确确美得让人目瞪口呆。黑如玛瑙，光滑洁亮，在他的火把映照下仿佛会闪闪发光。他察觉到它们喜欢火，因而特地把火把插进其中一个较大的龙嘴里，果真火光大盛，影子在他身后的墙上大肆舞跃。龙牙宛如一柄柄黑钻石制成的长弯刀，长年浸涤于炽热的烈焰里，火把微焰对它们来说根本算不了什么。当他抽身离去时，他发誓那头巨兽空洞的眼窝是目送着自己离开的。
There were nineteen skulls. The oldest was more than three thousand years old; the youngest a mere century and a half. The most recent were also the smallest; a matched pair no bigger than mastiff’s skulls, and oddly misshapen, all that remained of the last two hatchlings born on Dragonstone. They were the last of the Targaryen dragons, perhaps the last dragons anywhere, and they had not lived very long.
巨龙头骨一共十九个，最老的寿命已经超过三千年，最幼小的也有一个半世纪那么久。幼龙的头骨也是最小的，那两个畸形怪状，比猎犬的头骨大不了多少，它们是龙石岛上所孵化的最后两只龙，是坦格利安家族最后的两只，或许也是这世界上最后的两只，它们非常短命。
From there the skulls ranged upward in size to the three great monsters of song and story, the dragons that Aegon Targaryen and his sisters had unleashed on the Seven Kingdoms of old. The singers had given them the names of gods: Balerion, Meraxes, Vhaghar. Tyrion had stood between their gaping jaws, wordless and awed. You could have ridden a horse down Vhaghar’s gullet, although you would not have ridden it out again. Meraxes was even bigger. And the greatest of them, Balerion, the Black Dread, could have swallowed an aurochs whole, or even one of the hairy mammoths said to roam the cold wastes beyond the Port of Ibben.
其他的龙头则一个比一个大，最大的三头便是歌谣和传说里最恐怖的巨兽，即伊耿·坦格利安和他的妹妹们攻打古代七国时所骑乘的那三头龙。吟游诗人为他们都取了神的名字：贝勒里恩、米拉西斯和瓦格哈尔。提利昂站在他们的血盆大口间，震慑得说不出话来。瓦格哈尔的咽喉之大，大到你可以骑马进去，当然别想活着出来。米拉西斯体型更加惊人。而最硕大无朋，人称“黑死神”的贝勒里恩，则可一口吞下整只野牛，或是传说中漫游于伊班港以北冰冷荒原上的长毛象。
Tyrion stood in that dank cellar for a long time, staring at Balerion’s huge, empty-eyed skull until his torch burned low, trying to grasp the size of the living animal, to imagine how it must have looked when it spread its great black wings and swept across the skies, breathing fire.
提利昂在阴湿地窖里伫立良久，盯着贝勒里恩空洞而巨大的眼窝，试着想像眼前这只巨兽生前的模样，想像它开展双翼，横扫天际，口吐烈焰的景象，直到火把燃尽。
His own remote ancestor, King Loren of the Rock, had tried to stand against the fire when he joined with King Mern of the Reach to oppose the Targaryen conquest. That was close on three hundred years ago, when the Seven Kingdoms were kingdoms, and not mere provinces of a greater realm. Between them, the Two Kings had six hundred banners flying, five thousand mounted knights, and ten times as many freeriders and men-at-arms. Aegon Dragonlord had perhaps a fifth that number, the chroniclers said, and most of those were conscripts from the ranks of the last king he had slain, their loyalties uncertain.
他的远祖凯岩王罗伦，曾与河湾王孟恩联军抵抗坦格利安的征服。那是约三百年前的事，当时七大王国真的是各自为政的王国，而非今日大一统国度下的属地。两军合计有六百诸侯，五千骑兵，以及五万以上的雇佣军和步兵。据史家记载，“龙王”伊耿的军力大概只有对手的五分之一，其中多半是从他之前击败的敌手军队中召募而来，忠诚堪忧。
The hosts met on the broad plains of the Reach, amidst golden fields of wheat ripe for harvest. When the Two Kings charged, the Targaryen army shivered and shattered and began to run. For a few moments, the chroniclers wrote, the conquest was at an end … but only for those few moments, before Aegon Targaryen and his sisters joined the battle.
两军在河湾沿岸的沃野平畴中相遇，在遍地结实累累、等待收获的金黄麦田上交战。联军发动冲锋，坦格利安军立时四散溃逃。短短几分钟内，史家又如此写道，连年的征服似乎就要划上休止符……但这只是伊耿·坦格利安和他两个妹妹投入战局之前的那几分钟。
It was the only time that Vhaghar, Meraxes, and Balerion were all unleashed at once. The singers called it the Field of Fire.
这是历史上惟一一次瓦格哈尔、米拉西斯和贝勒里恩同时出击，后世的吟游诗人称之为“怒火燎原”。
Near four thousand men had burned that day, among them King Mern of the Reach. King Loren had escaped, and lived long enough to surrender, pledge his fealty to the Targaryens, and beget a son, for which Tyrion was duly grateful.
那天共有将近四千名士兵被烧成灰烬，其中包括河湾王孟恩。罗伦王侥幸逃脱，没过多久便向坦格利安家族投降称臣，后来还产下一子，为此提利昂只有感激的份。
“Why do you read so much?”
“你读那么多书干嘛？”
Tyrion looked up at the sound of the voice. Jon Snow was standing a few feet away, regarding him curiously. He closed the book on a finger and said, “Look at me and tell me what you see.”
提利昂闻言抬头，琼恩·雪诺正站在几步以外，好奇地端详他。他用一根手指夹住正读的书页：“看着我，然后告诉我你看到了什么？”
The boy looked at him suspiciously. “Is this some kind of trick? I see you. Tyrion Lannister.”
男孩狐疑地看着他说：“你耍什么把戏？我看到你啊，提利昂·兰尼斯特。”
Tyrion sighed. “You are remarkably polite for a bastard, Snow. What you see is a dwarf. You are what, twelve?”
提利昂叹道：“雪诺啊，你是个私生子，却真是够客气。你看到的是个侏儒。你几岁了？十二？”
“Fourteen,” the boy said.
“十四。”
“Fourteen, and you’re taller than I will ever be. My legs are short and twisted, and I walk with difficulty. I require a special saddle to keep from falling off my horse. A saddle of my own design, you may be interested to know. It was either that or ride a pony. My arms are strong enough, but again, too short. I will never make a swordsman. Had I been born a peasant, they might have left me out to die, or sold me to some slaver’s grotesquerie. Alas, I was born a Lannister of Casterly Rock, and the grotesqueries are all the poorer. Things are expected of me. My father was the Hand of the King for twenty years. My brother later killed that very same king, as it turns out, but life is full of these little ironies. My sister married the new king and my repulsive nephew will be king after him. I must do my part for the honor of my House, wouldn’t you agree? Yet how? Well, my legs may be too small for my body, but my head is too large, although I prefer to think it is just large enough for my mind. I have a realistic grasp of my own strengths and weaknesses. My mind is my weapon. My brother has his sword, King Robert has his warhammer, and I have my mind … and a mind needs books as a sword needs a whetstone, if it is to keep its edge.” Tyrion tapped the leather cover of the book. “That’s why I read so much, Jon Snow.”
“你才十四岁，我却一辈子长不到你现在这个高度。我这双脚又短又畸形，连走路都成问题，骑马还得配着特殊打造的马鞍，才不会摔下去。你有兴趣瞧瞧的话，这马鞍是我自己设计的。假如我不用它，就只能骑着孩子的小矮马。我的手臂还算强壮，但仍旧太短，所以永远也成不了好战士。如果我生在普通农家，早被扔在路边等死，不然就是卖进怪物杂耍团。唉，谁知我偏又生在凯岩城的兰尼斯特家，怪胎更不受欢迎，只因先前众人对我万般期待。你瞧，我爹干了二十年的御前首相，结果我老哥后来竟把国王给宰了，人生就是这样变幻无常。如今我老姐嫁给了新任国王，而我那脾气暴躁的外甥呢，有朝一日则会继任王位，只有我空担着家族的名誉，总得尽点心力，你说对罢？但是要怎么做呢？呵，我的腿太短，头却太大，总算这脑袋对我还算合适，凭着它我很清楚自己能干什么不能干什么，它就是我的武器。老哥有他的宝剑，劳勃国王有他的战锤，我则有我的脑袋瓜……不过人若要保持思路清晰锐利，就得多读书，就好像宝剑需要磨刀石一样。”提利昂轻敲书皮，“琼恩·雪诺，这就是为什么我读个不停啰。”
The boy absorbed that all in silence. He had the Stark face if not the name: long, solemn, guarded, a face that gave nothing away. Whoever his mother had been, she had left little of herself in her son. “What are you reading about?” he asked.
男孩静静地听完这番话。他虽然名分上没有史塔克这个姓，却有张地地道道史塔克家人的脸：脸长，严肃拘谨，喜怒不形于色。不论他母亲是谁，想必在他身上没留下多少自己的特征。“那你在读什么？”他问。
“Dragons,” Tyrion told him.
“跟龙有关的东西。”提利昂告诉他。
“What good is that? There are no more dragons,” the boy said with the easy certainty of youth.
“读这有什么用？世上已经没有龙了。”男孩语气里带着少年独有的确信。
“So they say,” Tyrion replied. “Sad, isn’t it? When I was your age, I used to dream of having a dragon of my own.”
“人们是这样说没错，”提利昂答道，“很可惜，不是吗？我在你这年纪的时候，还经常梦想哪天有自己的龙哪。”
“You did?” the boy said suspiciously. Perhaps he thought Tyrion was making fun of him.
“真的吗？”男孩难以置信地说。或许他认为提利昂在寻他开心罢。
“Oh, yes. Even a stunted, twisted, ugly little boy can look down over the world when he’s seated on a dragon’s back.” Tyrion pushed the bearskin aside and climbed to his feet. “I used to start fires in the bowels of Casterly Rock and stare at the flames for hours, pretending they were dragonfire. Sometimes I’d imagine my father burning. At other times, my sister.” Jon Snow was staring at him, a look equal parts horror and fascination. Tyrion guffawed. “Don’t look at me that way, bastard. I know your secret. You’ve dreamt the same kind of dreams.”
“当然是真的了，只要能骑在龙背上，即便是发育不良，畸形扭曲的丑陋小男孩也可以睥睨全世界。”提利昂推开熊皮，站起身来。“以前我常躲在凯岩城深处的地道，燃起火堆，望着熊熊烈焰，一望就是好几个钟头，一边幻想那是魔龙吐出的烈火。有时候我会幻想我老爸被火烧死，有时候则是我老姐。”琼恩·雪诺一脸既害怕又惊奇的表情，提利昂看了哈哈大笑，“小杂种，别用那种眼光看我，我知道你心里在想什么，你也有过这样的梦吧。”
“No,” Jon Snow said, horrified. “I wouldn’t …”
“我才没有，”琼恩·雪诺害怕地说，“我不会……。”
“No? Never?” Tyrion raised an eyebrow. “Well, no doubt the Starks have been terribly good to you. I’m certain Lady Stark treats you as if you were one of her own. And your brother Robb, he’s always been kind, and why not? He gets Winterfell and you get the Wall. And your father … he must have good reasons for packing you off to the Night’s Watch …”
“没有？从来没有？”提利昂抬起一边眉毛，“那想必史塔克一家人待你不薄？想必夫人对你也视如己出啰？还有你那异母兄弟罗柏，向来都跟你很亲是罢？为什么不呢？他得到临冬城，你得到的却是绝境长城。至于你父亲大人嘛……他一定也有正当理由，才会把你送去当守夜人……。”
“Stop it,” Jon Snow said, his face dark with anger. “The Night’s Watch is a noble calling!”
“不要再说了，”琼恩·雪诺脸色阴沉地怒道，“加入守夜人是神圣的使命！”
Tyrion laughed. “You’re too smart to believe that. The Night’s Watch is a midden heap for all the misfits of the realm. I’ve seen you looking at Yoren and his boys. Those are your new brothers, Jon Snow, how do you like them? Sullen peasants, debtors, poachers, rapers, thieves, and bastards like you all wind up on the Wall, watching for grumkins and snarks and all the other monsters your wet nurse warned you about. The good part is there are no grumkins or snarks, so it’s scarcely dangerous work. The bad part is you freeze your balls off, but since you’re not allowed to breed anyway, I don’t suppose that matters.”
提利昂笑笑。“聪明如你，怎会相信这种屁话？守夜人军团是个专门接收全国各地人渣废物的垃圾场，我瞧见了你看尤伦和他手下那两小子的神色，他们就是你的新弟兄，琼恩·雪诺，你可还喜欢？一脸死相的农奴、欠债鬼、盗猎者、强奸犯、小偷，还有像你这样的私生子通通都发配到长城上来，负责防范你奶妈小时候告诉你的各种古灵精怪。往好的方面想嘛，根本就没有什么古灵精怪；可是往坏处想呢，那地方冷得连命根子都要冻掉。不过既然原本就不准你生育后代，我看也没什么关系。”
“Stop it!” the boy screamed. He took a step forward, his hands coiling into fists, close to tears.
“不要说了！”男孩尖叫着前跨一步，双手握拳，眼看就要掉下泪来。
Suddenly, absurdly, Tyrion felt guilty. He took a step forward, intending to give the boy a reassuring pat on the shoulder or mutter some word of apology.
提利昂突然很荒谬地有股罪恶感，他也朝前走了一步，想拍拍男孩肩膀安慰他，或是道声歉。
He never saw the wolf, where it was or how it came at him. One moment he was walking toward Snow and the next he was flat on his back on the hard rocky ground, the book spinning away from him as he fell, the breath going out of him at the sudden impact, his mouth full of dirt and blood and rotting leaves. As he tried to get up, his back spasmed painfully. He must have wrenched it in the fall. He ground his teeth in frustration, grabbed a root, and pulled himself back to a sitting position. “Help me,” he said to the boy, reaching up a hand.
那只狼究竟是从什么地方出现的，他自始至终没有瞧见。前一刻他正朝雪诺走去，下一刻已被迎面扑倒在坚石地上，手中的书飞出老远。他被撞得喘不过气来，满嘴都是泥土血腥和枯枝腐叶。等他挣扎着想起身，背部却又剧烈地痉挛，一定是摔倒的时候扭了。他气恼地咬紧牙根，勾着一节树根，勉强坐住。“帮帮我罢。”他朝男孩伸出手。
And suddenly the wolf was between them. He did not growl. The damned thing never made a sound. He only looked at him with those bright red eyes, and showed him his teeth, and that was more than enough. Tyrion sagged back to the ground with a grunt. “Don’t help me, then. I’ll sit right here until you leave.”
突然，狼又出现在两人之间，它没有吼叫——这只该死的东西从不发出半点声音——只是用那双灿亮的红眼打量他，露出满口尖牙，这就够吓人的了。提利昂咕哝一声缩回地上。“不帮就算了，我就在这里，等你走了再说。”
Jon Snow stroked Ghost’s thick white fur, smiling now. “Ask me nicely.”
琼恩·雪诺搓搓白灵厚重的白毛，却笑了。“求我，我就帮你。”
Tyrion Lannister felt the anger coiling inside him, and crushed it out with a will. It was not the first time in his life he had been humiliated, and it would not be the last. Perhaps he even deserved this. “I should be very grateful for your kind assistance, Jon,” he said mildly.
提利昂·兰尼斯特只觉体内一股怒气逐渐酝酿，只好强自按捺。这不是他这辈子头一次遭人羞辱，肯定也不是最后一次，何况这次还是他自讨苦吃。“琼恩，如果你肯出手相助，我将非常感激。”他温和地说。
“Down, Ghost,” the boy said. The direwolf sat on his haunches. Those red eyes never left Tyrion. Jon came around behind him, slid his hands under his arms, and lifted him easily to his feet. Then he picked up the book and handed it back.
“白灵，坐下。”男孩命令，冰原狼听罢蹲坐下来，那对红眼却始终不曾离开提利昂。琼恩绕到他身后，把手伸到他腋下，轻松地扶他起来，然后捡书递给他。
“Why did he attack me?” Tyrion asked with a sidelong glance at the direwolf. He wiped blood and dirt from his mouth with the back of his hand.
“刚才它为什么攻击我？”提利昂问，他斜眼瞟了冰原狼一眼，用手背揩了揩嘴里的血污和泥巴。
“Maybe he thought you were a grumkin.”
“说不定他以为你就是古灵精怪哟。”
Tyrion glanced at him sharply. Then he laughed, a raw snort of amusement that came bursting out through his nose entirely without his permission. “Oh, gods,” he said, choking on his laughter and shaking his head, “I suppose I do rather look like a grumkin. What does he do to snarks?”
提利昂瞪了他一眼，接着放声大笑，那是一股他全然没有预期的原始笑意。“噢，诸神在上，”他笑得差点岔了气，不住摇头，“我想我看起来确实蛮像的嘛！那要是他遇上真的古灵精怪会有何反应啊？”
“You don’t want to know.” Jon picked up the wineskin and handed it to Tyrion.
“你不会想知道的。”琼恩拾起酒袋，交还提利昂。
Tyrion pulled out the stopper, tilted his head, and squeezed a long stream into his mouth. The wine was cool fire as it trickled down his throat and warmed his belly. He held out the skin to Jon Snow. “Want some?”
提利昂拉开塞子，侧着头喝了一大口，葡萄酒宛如一泓冷火，流过他的喉咙，温暖他的脾胃。他把皮囊传给琼恩·雪诺。“你来点？”
The boy took the skin and tried a cautious swallow. “It’s true, isn’t it?” he said when he was done. “What you said about the Night’s Watch.”
男孩接过酒袋，谨慎地啜了一口。“刚才你说的那些关于守夜人的事，”喝完之后他问，“都是真的？”
Tyrion nodded.
提利昂点点头。
Jon Snow set his mouth in a grim line. “If that’s what it is, that’s what it is.”
琼恩·雪诺神情肃穆地抿抿嘴。“那我就既来之则安之。”
Tyrion grinned at him. “That’s good, bastard. Most men would rather deny a hard truth than face it.”
提利昂朝他嘿嘿一笑。“私生子，真有你的。大部分的人宁可否认事实，也不愿面对真相。”
“Most men,” the boy said. “But not you.”
“那是大部分的人，”男孩道，“但不是你。”
“No,” Tyrion admitted, “not me. I seldom even dream of dragons anymore. There are no dragons.” He scooped up the fallen bearskin. “Come, we had better return to camp before your uncle calls the banners.”
“你说得对，”提利昂同意，“不是我。现在我连龙都很少去想了，这世上没有龙了。”他捡起掉落在地的熊皮。“走，我们还是趁你叔叔没出来找人之前回营去罢。”
The walk was short, but the ground was rough underfoot and his legs were cramping badly by the time they got back. Jon Snow offered a hand to help him over a thick tangle of roots, but Tyrion shook him off. He would make his own way, as he had all his life. Still, the camp was a welcome sight. The shelters had been thrown up against the tumbledown wall of a long-abandoned holdfast, a shield against the wind. The horses had been fed and a fire had been laid. Yoren sat on a stone, skinning a squirrel. The savory smell of stew filled Tyrion’s nostrils. He dragged himself over to where his man Morrec was tending the stewpot. Wordlessly, Morrec handed him the ladle. Tyrion tasted and handed it back. “More pepper,” he said.
回营的路虽然不长，但地面崎岖不平，等到赶回营区，他的双腿已经抽筋得厉害。琼恩·雪诺伸手准备帮他跨越一丛纠结繁密的树根，但提利昂却挥手拒绝了。他要自己走自己的路，一如他这一生。营地是一副令人欣喜的景象：人们围着一座早已废弃的庄舍倾颓的墙壁，搭起挡风的遮蔽，马儿都已喂饱，营火也生起来了，尤伦坐在一块石头上剥松鼠的皮。浓汤的香味溢满提利昂的鼻腔。他一跛一拐地拖着脚，走到正在搅拌热汤的仆人莫里斯身旁。莫里斯一言不发地把长柄杓递给他，提利昂尝了一口后交回去。“再多加点胡椒。”他说。
Benjen Stark emerged from the shelter he shared with his nephew. “There you are. Jon, damn it, don’t go off like that by yourself. I thought the Others had gotten you.”
班扬·史塔克从他和侄子共用的帐篷里冒出来：“琼恩，你总算回来了。妈的，别一个人到处乱跑，我还以为你给异鬼抓走了。”
“It was the grumkins,” Tyrion told him, laughing. Jon Snow smiled. Stark shot a baffled look at Yoren. The old man grunted, shrugged, and went back to his bloody work.
“他是被古灵精怪抓走的。”提利昂笑着告诉他，琼恩·雪诺也微微一笑。史塔克困惑地朝尤伦望去，那老头只耸耸肩，咕哝了一声，便又低头专心剥皮。
The squirrel gave some body to the stew, and they ate it with black bread and hard cheese that night around their fire. Tyrion shared around his skin of wine until even Yoren grew mellow. One by one the company drifted off to their shelters and to sleep, all but Jon Snow, who had drawn the night’s first watch.
那只松鼠为肉汤添了点美味，当晚他们就围坐在营火边，配着黑面包和硬乳酪吃。提利昂让大家分享他的美酒，直喝到连尤伦都满脸通红。接着，大伙便一个个起身回帐篷去睡了，只剩下抽到头班守夜的琼恩·雪诺。
Tyrion was the last to retire, as always. As he stepped into the shelter his men had built for him, he paused and looked back at Jon Snow. The boy stood near the fire, his face still and hard, looking deep into the flames.
提利昂照例是最后去睡的人，当踏进手下为他搭建的营房时，他停下脚步，转头回望。只见男孩站在营火边，面色坚毅凝重，深深望进跳跃的熊熊火焰。
Tyrion Lannister smiled sadly and went to bed.
提利昂·兰尼斯特哀伤地笑了笑，返身进入营帐就寝。
*CATELYN
第十五章 凯特琳
N ed and the girls were eight days gone when Maester Luwin came to her one night in Bran’s sickroom, carrying a reading lamp and the books of account. “It is past time that we reviewed the figures, my lady,” he said. “You’ll want to know how much this royal visit cost us.”
奈德和两个女儿离开后的第十八天夜里，鲁温学士带着一盏写字灯和账本，来到布兰的病房求见。“夫人，我们该清点账目了，”他说，“这样您才知道这次招待王室的开销。”
Catelyn looked at Bran in his sickbed and brushed his hair back off his forehead. It had grown very long, she realized. She would have to cut it soon. “I have no need to look at figures, Maester Luwin,” she told him, never taking her eyes from Bran. “I know what the visit cost us. Take the books away.”
凯特琳望着病榻上的布兰，拨开他额间细发，忽然察觉到他的头发长得好长，她得尽快找时间帮他修剪。“鲁温师傅，用不着给我看账目，”她告诉他，视线始终离不开布兰。“我知道宴客的支出有多吓人。把账本拿走罢。”
“My lady, the king’s party had healthy appetites. We must replenish our stores before—”
“夫人，国王的手下食量很大，我们得赶紧补充城里的存粮，以免……”
She cut him off. “I said, take the books away. The steward will attend to our needs.”
她打断他：“我说过，把账本拿走。这些事交给总管去处理。”
“We have no steward,” Maester Luwin reminded her. Like a little grey rat, she thought, he would not let go. “Poole went south to establish Lord Eddard’s household at King’s Landing.”
“我们没有总管了，”鲁温学士提醒她。他就像只灰鼠，她心想，咬住了就不肯罢休。“普尔随同老爷南下去了君临，以管理艾德大人的家务事。”
Catelyn nodded absently. “Oh, yes. I remember.” Bran looked so pale. She wondered whether they might move his bed under the window, so he could get the morning sun.
凯特琳漫不经心地点点头。“噢，对，我想起来了。”布兰看起来好苍白，她暗自思索不知能否把病床移到窗边，好让他晒点早晨的太阳。
Maester Luwin set the lamp in a niche by the door and fiddled with its wick. “There are several appointments that require your immediate attention, my lady. Besides the steward, we need a captain of the guards to fill Jory’s place, a new master of horse—”
鲁温学士把油灯安置在门边的壁龛里，胡乱捻着灯芯。“夫人，还有好些职务要请您立刻决定。除总管外，我们需要一名新的守卫队长，以替代乔里的位子，还有新的马房总管——”
Her eyes snapped around and found him. “A master of horse?” Her voice was a whip.
她的双眼倏地转去，紧紧盯住他。“马房总管？”她的声音如鞭子破空。
The maester was shaken. “Yes, my lady. Hullen rode south with Lord Eddard, so—”
老学士显然被吓了一跳。“是的，夫人，胡伦也和艾德大人一起南下，所以——”
“My son lies here broken and dying, Luwin, and you wish to discuss a new master of horse? Do you think I care what happens in the stables? Do you think it matters to me one whit? I would gladly butcher every horse in Winterfell with my own hands if it would open Bran’s eyes, do you understand that? Do you!”
“鲁温，我儿子支离破碎地躺在这里等死，你却要跟我讨论一个管马的家伙？你觉得我在乎马厩里发生了什么事吗？你觉得那边发生的事和我沾得上一点边吗？如果杀光全城的马可以让布兰睁开眼睛，我会很乐意地亲自动手，你听懂了没有？听懂了没有？”
He bowed his head. “Yes, my lady, but the appointments—”
他低下头。“夫人，我听得懂，但是这些职位等不——”
“I’ll make the appointments,” Robb said.
“我来安排。”罗柏道。
Catelyn had not heard him enter, but there he stood in the doorway, looking at her. She had been shouting, she realized with a sudden flush of shame. What was happening to her? She was so tired, and her head hurt all the time.
凯特琳没听见罗柏的脚步声，但抬头就发现他站在过道里，定定地看着她。她想起自己刚才大呼小叫的举动，脸倏地一红，为自己羞耻。我究竟是怎么了？她只觉得好累，头一整天痛个没完。
Maester Luwin looked from Catelyn to her son. “I have prepared a list of those we might wish to consider for the vacant offices,” he said, offering Robb a paper plucked from his sleeve.
鲁温师傅看看凯特琳，又看看她儿子。“我已经列好一份合适人选的名单。”他边说边从袖子里掏出一张纸交给罗柏。
Her son glanced at the names. He had come from outside, Catelyn saw; his cheeks were red from the cold, his hair shaggy and windblown. “Good men,” he said. “We’ll talk about them tomorrow.” He handed back the list of names.
她的儿子扫了一眼清单上的名字。凯特琳这才发现他刚从外面回来，两颊给冻得红扑扑，头发也被风吹得乱七八糟。“都是很好的人选，”他说：“我们明天再来谈谈这事。”他把名单交还鲁温学士。
“Very good, my lord.” The paper vanished into his sleeve.
“好的，大人。”那张纸立刻消失在他袖子里。
“Leave us now,” Robb said. Maester Luwin bowed and departed. Robb closed the door behind him and turned to her. He was wearing a sword, she saw. “Mother, what are you doing?”
“你先退下吧。”罗柏道。鲁温学士颔首离去，罗柏关上门，转身面对她。她看到他身上还配了把剑。“母亲，你这又是何苦呢？”
Catelyn had always thought Robb looked like her; like Bran and Rickon and Sansa, he had the Tully coloring, the auburn hair, the blue eyes. Yet now for the first time she saw something of Eddard Stark in his face, something as stern and hard as the north. “What am I doing?” she echoed, puzzled. “How can you ask that? What do you imagine I’m doing? I am taking care of your brother. I am taking care of Bran.”
凯特琳一直都觉得罗柏长得最像她。他和布兰、瑞肯、珊莎一样，生有一副徒利家的漂亮颜色——枣红头发、碧蓝眼瞳，如今她再一次在他脸上读了艾德·史塔克的神色，一种属于北方的坚毅冷峻。“我怎么了？”她困惑地应道，“你怎么能问这种话？你以为我在做什么，我在照顾你弟弟，我在照顾布兰哪。”
“Is that what you call it? You haven’t left this room since Bran was hurt. You didn’t even come to the gate when Father and the girls went south.”
“这哪叫照顾？自布兰受伤以来，你就没踏出这房间半步，连父亲和妹妹他们南下的时候，你也没到城门口去送行。”
“I said my farewells to them here, and watched them ride out from that window.” She had begged Ned not to go, not now, not after what had happened; everything had changed now, couldn’t he see that? It was no use. He had no choice, he had told her, and then he left, choosing. “I can’t leave him, even for a moment, not when any moment could be his last. I have to be with him, if … if …” She took her son’s limp hand, sliding his fingers through her own. He was so frail and thin, with no strength left in his hand, but she could still feel the warmth of life through his skin.
“我在这房里跟他们道了别，还在窗边目送他们离去。”当时她苦苦哀求奈德别走，尤其在发生了这种惨剧之后。难道他看不出来现在一切都改变了吗？结果却徒劳无功，他说他别无选择，而他的选择就是南下。“我不能丢下他，哪怕一刻也不行，他随时可能咽下最后一口气。我得守着他，以免……以免……”她握起爱子了无生气的手掌，把他的手指滑过自己的指间。他实在好脆弱好消瘦，手里半点力气也没有，好在透过他的皮肤，仍旧能感觉生命的温暖。
Robb’s voice softened. “He’s not going to die, Mother. Maester Luwin says the time of greatest danger has passed.”
罗柏的语气和缓下来：“母亲，他不会死的，鲁温师傅说危险期已经过了。”
“And what if Maester Luwin is wrong? What if Bran needs me and I’m not here?”
“那要是鲁温师傅错了呢？要是布兰需要我时我却不在呢？”
“Rickon needs you,” Robb said sharply. “He’s only three, he doesn’t understand what’s happening. He thinks everyone has deserted him, so he follows me around all day, clutching my leg and crying. I don’t know what to do with him.” He paused a moment, chewing on his lower lip the way he’d done when he was little. “Mother, I need you too. I’m trying but I can’t … I can’t do it all by myself.” His voice broke with sudden emotion, and Catelyn remembered that he was only fourteen. She wanted to get up and go to him, but Bran was still holding her hand and she could not move.
“需要你的人是瑞肯，”罗柏语锋转厉，“他才三岁，还根本搞不清事态。他只以为大家都不要他了，所以成天跟着我，抱着我大腿又哭又闹，我真不知该怎么办才好！”说到这里他突然停了下来，像他小时候习惯的那样咬咬下嘴唇。“妈，我也需要你啊。我很努力在尝试，可我……我一个人做不来啊！”随着这突如其来的情绪激动，他的声音陡地沙哑，凯特琳这才想起他不过十四岁。她好想站起来去抱抱他，但布兰仍旧握着她的手，她没法动弹。
Outside the tower, a wolf began to howl. Catelyn trembled, just for a second.
高塔之外传来一声狼嚎，凯特琳不禁浑身颤抖。
“Bran’s.” Robb opened the window and let the night air into the stuffy tower room. The howling grew louder. It was a cold and lonely sound, full of melancholy and despair.
“是布兰的狼。”罗柏打开窗，让晚风灌进窒闷的高塔斗室。狼嚎声越来越大，那是一种冷彻心肺的孤绝之音，充满忧郁和绝望。
“Don’t,” she told him. “Bran needs to stay warm.”
“别开窗，”她告诉他，“让布兰暖和点。”
“He needs to hear them sing,” Robb said. Somewhere out in Winterfell, a second wolf began to howl in chorus with the first. Then a third, closer. “Shaggydog and Grey Wind,” Robb said as their voices rose and fell together. “You can tell them apart if you listen close.”
“他需要听听小狼的叫声。”罗柏道。在临冬城的某处，又有一只狼加入到长嚎的阵容，之后又是一只，这次离高塔比较近。“是毛毛狗和灰风。”在高低起伏，抑扬顿挫的狼嚎声中，罗柏说：“仔细听，你可以分辨出他们。”
Catelyn was shaking. It was the grief, the cold, the howling of the direwolves. Night after night, the howling and the cold wind and the grey empty castle, on and on they went, never changing, and her boy lying there broken, the sweetest of her children, the gentlest, Bran who loved to laugh and climb and dreamt of knighthood, all gone now, she would never hear him laugh again. Sobbing, she pulled her hand free of his and covered her ears against those terrible howls. “Make them stop!” she cried. “I can’t stand it, make them stop, make them stop, kill them all if you must, just make them stop!”
凯特琳却仍旧颤抖不已，这不仅因为悲伤，因为寒冷，还因为冰原狼的叫声。夜复一夜，日复一日，狼嚎、凛风和灰暗空寂的城堡，漫无边际地延续，恒常不变，而她的爱子却倒卧病榻，这是她最甜美的孩子，那个爱笑，爱爬，爱做骑士梦的布兰，如今全成了过眼云烟，只怕此生再也听不到他的笑声。思及此处，她泣不成声，不顾一切地自他掌中抽出双手，捂住耳朵，不愿再听外面那骇人的狼嚎。“叫他们别叫了！”她喊，“我受不了，叫他们别叫了，别叫了，就算杀了他们也没关系，只要他们别叫就好！”
She didn’t remember falling to the floor, but there she was, and Robb was lifting her, holding her in strong arms. “Don’t be afraid, Mother. They would never hurt him.” He helped her to her narrow bed in the corner of the sickroom. “Close your eyes,” he said gently. “Rest. Maester Luwin tells me you’ve hardly slept since Bran’s fall.”
她不记得自己何时跌倒在地，但她确实在地上，罗柏扶她起身，用强壮的双臂环住她。“母亲，您别怕，他们绝对不会伤害布兰。”他搀她走到病房角落她的狭窄小床边。“闭上眼睛，”他温柔地说，“好好休息。鲁温师傅跟我说打布兰出事以来您几乎没阖过眼。”
“I can’t,” she wept. “Gods forgive me, Robb, I can’t, what if he dies while I’m asleep, what if he dies, what if he dies …” The wolves were still howling. She screamed and held her ears again. “Oh, gods, close the window!”
“我怎么能休息？”她啜泣，“诸神开眼，罗柏，我不能休息，万一他在我熟睡时过去了，万一……万一……”窗外狼嚎依旧。她高声尖叫，再度捂紧耳朵。“噢，天哪，天哪，关上窗子罢！”
“If you swear to me you’ll sleep.” Robb went to the window, but as he reached for the shutters another sound was added to the mournful howling of the direwolves. “Dogs,” he said, listening. “All the dogs are barking. They’ve never done that before …” Catelyn heard his breath catch in his throat. When she looked up, his face was pale in the lamplight. “Fire,” he whispered.
“如果你答应我先睡一会儿，我就关。”罗柏走到窗边，就在他伸手去拉的时候，冰原狼的悲鸣中又添加了一种新的声音。“是狗叫，”他专心倾听，“全城的狗都跟着叫起来了，它们以前不会这样的……”凯特琳听见他的呼吸哽在喉咙，便抬起头，只见灯光下他面容惨白。“失火了。”他喃喃道。
Fire , she thought, and then, Bran! “Help me,” she said urgently, sitting up. “Help me with Bran.”
失火了，她的第一反应是，救救布兰！“快帮帮我，”她催促，“快帮我把布兰抱起来。”
Robb did not seem to hear her. “The library tower’s on fire,” he said.
可罗柏好像根本没听见。“藏书塔失火了。”他说。
Catelyn could see the flickering reddish light through the open window now. She sagged with relief. Bran was safe. The library was across the bailey, there was no way the fire would reach them here. “Thank the gods,” she whispered.
透过敞开的窗户，凯特琳看见闪曳的红色亮光。她如释重负，布兰安全了，藏书塔位于城廓之外，火势无论如何没有蔓延到这里的可能。“感谢老天。”她低声轻语。
Robb looked at her as if she’d gone mad. “Mother, stay here. I’ll come back as soon as the fire’s out.” He ran then. She heard him shout to the guards outside the room, heard them descending together in a wild rush, taking the stairs two and three at a time.
罗柏看她的眼神仿佛将她当成了疯子，“母亲，请您留在这里，火势扑灭之后我就回来。”说完他便跑了出去。她听见他朝门外守卫发号施令，随后他们三步并作两步急奔下楼。
Outside, there were shouts of “Fire!” in the yard, screams, running footsteps, the whinny of frightened horses, and the frantic barking of the castle dogs. The howling was gone, she realized as she listened to the cacophony. The direwolves had fallen silent.
外面广场上传来“失火了！”的呐喊、尖叫、奔跑的脚步声、受惊的马儿嘶鸣以及惊狂的狗吠。在阵阵不和谐的声响中，她突然发现听不见狼嚎了，不知怎地，冰原狼都安静了下来。
Catelyn said a silent prayer of thanks to the seven faces of god as she went to the window. Across the bailey, long tongues of flame shot from the windows of the library. She watched the smoke rise into the sky and thought sadly of all the books the Starks had gathered over the centuries. Then she closed the shutters.
凯特琳走向窗边，心中朝着至高七神默默祷告，以示感激之情。隔着城廓，只见长长的火舌自藏书高塔窗间吐射而出。她望着浓烟直冲云霄，不禁暗自为陷身火海的珍本古籍而惋惜，它们可都是史塔克家族历经多少世代辛苦累积的精华哪。然后她关上了窗。
When she turned away from the window, the man was in the room with her.
转过身，她才发现屋里多了一名男子。
“You weren’t s’posed to be here,” he muttered sourly. “No one was s’posed to be here.”
“你不该在这儿，”他阴沉地嘀咕，“这里不该有人。”
He was a small, dirty man in filthy brown clothing, and he stank of horses. Catelyn knew all the men who worked in their stables, and he was none of them. He was gaunt, with limp blond hair and pale eyes deep-sunk in a bony face, and there was a dagger in his hand.
他穿着一身脏污的褐色衣服，个头很小，浑身散发出马臊味。凯特琳对在马厩工作的仆人了如指掌，却对眼前来人毫无印象。他骨瘦如柴，生了一头软塌的金黄色头发，暗淡的双眼凹陷在皮包骨的脸上，手里握着一把匕首。
Catelyn looked at the knife, then at Bran. “No,” she said. The word stuck in her throat, the merest whisper.
凯特琳望望那把刀，再看看布兰。“不。”她说。话卡在喉咙里出不来，传出的只剩最微弱的低语。
He must have heard her. “It’s a mercy,” he said. “He’s dead already.”
想必他还是听到了。“这是为他好。”他说，“反正他跟死人也没两样。”
“No,” Catelyn said, louder now as she found her voice again. “No, you can’t.” She spun back toward the window to scream for help, but the man moved faster than she would have believed. One hand clamped down over her mouth and yanked back her head, the other brought the dagger up to her windpipe. The stench of him was overwhelming.
“不，”凯特琳找回了声音，说话大声起来。“不行，不准你这么做！”她箭步奔向窗边想大声呼救，但对方的动作快得惊人，他飞快地伸出一只手捂住她的嘴巴，将她的头往后扯，利刃随即架上她的咽喉。他全身臭气熏天，她简直快要窒息。
She reached up with both hands and grabbed the blade with all her strength, pulling it away from her throat. She heard him cursing into her ear. Her fingers were slippery with blood, but she would not let go of the dagger. The hand over her mouth clenched more tightly, shutting off her air. Catelyn twisted her head to the side and managed to get a piece of his flesh between her teeth. She bit down hard into his palm. The man grunted in pain. She ground her teeth together and tore at him, and all of a sudden he let go. The taste of his blood filled her mouth. She sucked in air and screamed, and he grabbed her hair and pulled her away from him, and she stumbled and went down, and then he was standing over her, breathing hard, shaking. The dagger was still clutched tightly in his right hand, slick with blood. “You weren’t s’posed to be here,” he repeated stupidly.
她双手齐伸握住匕首，死命将之扯离喉咙。耳边传来他的咒骂，虽然指间鲜血淋漓，她却依旧不肯放手。捂住她嘴巴的手钳制得更紧，使她呼吸困难。凯特琳猛力扭头，在上下齿缝间找到他的手，狠狠地咬将下去。男人痛苦地闷哼一声，她又咬紧牙关用力撕扯，迫使他陡地松开手。她满嘴都是血腥，深深吸了口气，然后厉声尖叫起来。男子见状，忙一把攫住她的头发，使劲一推，她踉跄跌步，倒在地上。他站在她身边大声喘息，颤抖不已，右手仍紧握着那把匕首，刃锋上全是血。“你不该在这儿。”他笨拙地重复这句话。
Catelyn saw the shadow slip through the open door behind him. There was a low rumble, less than a snarl, the merest whisper of a threat, but he must have heard something, because he started to turn just as the wolf made its leap. They went down together, half sprawled over Catelyn where she’d fallen. The wolf had him under the jaw. The man’s shriek lasted less than a second before the beast wrenched back its head, taking out half his throat.
这时，凯特琳看见一道黑影从他身后的门口溜了进来，低低地吼了一声，算不上咆哮，只能说是充满威胁的低语。但他应该还是听见了，因为当狼飞身跃起朝他扑去时，他正准备转身。人和狼同时扑翻在地，卧倒在凯特琳跌落的地方。狼张口便咬，男人的惨叫持续还不到一秒，狼便一扭头，拧下他半个喉咙。
His blood felt like warm rain as it sprayed across her face.
鲜血有如一阵温热的雨溅洒在她脸上。
The wolf was looking at her. Its jaws were red and wet and its eyes glowed golden in the dark room. It was Bran’s wolf, she realized. Of course it was. “Thank you,” Catelyn whispered, her voice faint and tiny. She lifted her hand, trembling. The wolf padded closer, sniffed at her fingers, then licked at the blood with a wet rough tongue. When it had cleaned all the blood off her hand, it turned away silently and jumped up on Bran’s bed and lay down beside him. Catelyn began to laugh hysterically.
狼目不转睛地盯着她瞧，嘴巴腥红，湿漉漉的，眼瞳在暗室里闪着熠熠金光。她恍然大悟，这是布兰的狼，当然是了。“谢谢你。”凯特琳轻声说，她的声音微弱而细小。她举起手，却止不住颤抖。小狼轻步走近，闻闻她的手指头，然后用他粗糙但温润的舌头舔了舔指间的鲜血。舔净之后，他静静地转身跃上布兰的病床，在他身边躺下。凯特琳歇斯底里地笑了起来。
That was the way they found them, when Robb and Maester Luwin and Ser Rodrik burst in with half the guards in Winterfell. When the laughter finally died in her throat, they wrapped her in warm blankets and led her back to the Great Keep, to her own chambers. Old Nan undressed her and helped her into a scalding hot bath and washed the blood off her with a soft cloth.
后来当罗柏、鲁温学士和罗德利克爵士带着临冬城半数以上的卫士冲进房里时，他们所见到的就是这番景象。当笑声终于止息，他们把她包裹在温暖的毛毯里，带回主堡卧室。老奶妈为她褪去衣物，搀扶她洗了个滚烫的热水澡，并用软布揩去她身上血污。之后鲁温师傅帮她包扎伤口。她指间的刀伤极深，几可见骨，头皮也因刚才粗暴拉扯掉几撮头发而汨汨流血。老师傅告诉她疼痛才刚开始，要她喝下罂粟花奶以安眠入梦。
Afterward Maester Luwin arrived to dress her wounds. The cuts in her fingers went deep, almost to the bone, and her scalp was raw and bleeding where he’d pulled out a handful of hair. The maester told her the pain was just starting now, and gave her milk of the poppy to help her sleep.
最后她总算闭眼沉沉睡去。
Finally she closed her eyes.
再睁眼时，他们告诉她，已经过了四天。凯特琳点头坐起，想起布兰坠楼至今发生的所有事情，充斥血光和悲伤，犹如惊梦一场，但手上的伤痕却告诉她一切都是千真万确。她手脚发软，头重脚轻，思绪却出奇地明晰果决，如释重负。
When she opened them again, they told her that she had slept four days. Catelyn nodded and sat up in bed. It all seemed like a nightmare to her now, everything since Bran’s fall, a terrible dream of blood and grief, but she had the pain in her hands to remind her that it was real. She felt weak and light-headed, yet strangely resolute, as if a great weight had lifted from her.
“我要吃点面包和蜂蜜，”她吩咐仆人，“顺便通知鲁温师傅，说我的伤该换药了。”他们惊奇地看着她，连忙照吩咐行事。
“Bring me some bread and honey,” she told her servants, “and take word to Maester Luwin that my bandages want changing.” They looked at her in surprise and ran to do her bidding.
凯特琳忆起自己这些日子来的模样，只觉羞愧无比。她辜负了大家的期望，辜负了她的孩子、她的丈夫和她的家族声望。同样的事绝不会发生第二次。她要让北方人见识见识奔流城的徒利家人有多么坚强。
Catelyn remembered the way she had been before, and she was ashamed. She had let them all down, her children, her husband, her House. It would not happen again. She would show these northerners how strong a Tully of Riverrun could be.
食物还没送上，罗柏率先赶到。随行的还有罗德利克·凯索和她丈夫的养子席恩·葛雷乔伊，以及肌肉发达，留了一撮棕褐色方正胡子的哈里斯·莫兰。罗柏说他是新上任的侍卫队长。她见到儿子披革裹甲，腰间还佩了剑。
Robb arrived before her food. Rodrik Cassel came with him, and her husband’s ward Theon Greyjoy, and lastly Hallis Mollen, a muscular guardsman with a square brown beard. He was the new captain of the guard, Robb said. Her son was dressed in boiled leather and ringmail, she saw, and a sword hung at his waist.
“他到底是谁？”她询问他们。
“Who was he?” Catelyn asked them.
“没人知道这家伙的名字。”哈里斯·莫兰告诉她。“夫人，他根本不是咱临冬城的人，只是前几个星期有人看到他在城堡附近出没。”
“No one knows his name,” Hallis Mollen told her. “He was no man of Winterfell, m’lady, but some says they seen him here and about the castle these past few weeks.”
“想必是国王的手下，”她说，“或是兰尼斯特家的走狗。他很可能在别人离开后躲了起来。”
“One of the king’s men, then,” she said, “or one of the Lannisters’. He could have waited behind when the others left.”
“很有可能，”哈尔道，“前阵子临冬城里到处都是外地人，谁也说不准他的来历。”
“Maybe,” Hal said. “With all these strangers filling up Winterfell of late, there’s no way of saying who he belonged to.”
“他躲在马厩，”葛雷乔伊说，“从他身上就能闻出来。”
“He’d been hiding in your stables,” Greyjoy said. “You could smell it on him.”
“那怎么没人发现？”她口气尖锐地问。
“And how could he go unnoticed?” she said sharply.
哈里斯·莫兰满脸通红。“除去艾德老爷带去南方的马和咱们送给守夜人的，马厩里没剩下几匹。要躲开马僮本也不是什么难事。或许阿多见着了他，听人说那孩子最近怪怪的，不过他那样单纯的人……”哈尔摇摇头。
Hallis Mollen looked abashed. “Between the horses Lord Eddard took south and them we sent north to the Night’s Watch, the stalls were half-empty. It were no great trick to hide from the stableboys. Could be Hodor saw him, the talk is that boy’s been acting queer, but simple as he is …” Hal shook his head.
“我们找到了他睡觉的地方，”罗柏插进来，“他在稻草堆下藏了个皮袋，里面有九十枚银鹿。”
“We found where he’d been sleeping,” Robb put in. “He had ninety silver stags in a leather bag buried beneath the straw.”
“这么说来我儿的性命还挺值钱。”凯特琳苦涩地说。
“It’s good to know my son’s life was not sold cheaply,” Catelyn said bitterly.
哈里斯·莫兰困惑地看看她。“夫人，恕我冒昧，您的意思是这厮打的是公子的主意？”
Hallis Mollen looked at her, confused. “Begging your grace, m’lady, you saying he was out to kill your boy?”
葛雷乔伊一脸狐疑。“这太疯狂了。”
Greyjoy was doubtful. “That’s madness.”
“他正是冲着布兰来的，”凯特琳道，“他从头到尾念个不停，说我不该在这儿。显然他放火引燃藏书塔，以为我会带着所有的卫士冲出去救火。假如不是我伤心得乱了方寸，恐怕他就已经得逞。”
“He came for Bran,” Catelyn said. “He kept muttering how I wasn’t supposed to be there. He set the library fire thinking I would rush to put it out, taking any guards with me. If I hadn’t been half-mad with grief, it would have worked.”
“可干嘛对布兰下手呢？”罗柏道，“诸神在上，他不过是个弱小的孩子，病体单薄，沉睡不醒……”
“Why would anyone want to kill Bran?” Robb said. “Gods, he’s only a little boy, helpless, sleeping …”
凯特琳尖锐地看了她长子一眼。“罗柏，若你想统治北方，就得学着去思考这种问题。你自己想想自己的问题，为什么有人要对一个熟睡的孩子下手？”
Catelyn gave her firstborn a challenging look. “If you are to rule in the north, you must think these things through, Robb. Answer your own question. Why would anyone want to kill a sleeping child?”
他还未及回答，仆人便送上了热腾腾的餐点：有热面包、奶油、蜂蜜和黑梅果酱，培根和白煮蛋，还有乳酪与一壶薄荷茶，比她要求的丰盛许多。接着鲁温师傅也进来了。
Before he could answer, the servants returned with a plate of food fresh from the kitchen. There was much more than she’d asked for: hot bread, butter and honey and blackberry preserves, a rasher of bacon and a soft-boiled egg, a wedge of cheese, a pot of mint tea. And with it came Maester Luwin.
“师傅，我儿怎么样了？”凯特琳望望眼前的丰盛食物，却毫无胃口。
“How is my son, Maester?” Catelyn looked at all the food and found she had no appetite.
鲁温学士低头：“夫人，病情没有变化。”
Maester Luwin lowered his eyes. “Unchanged, my lady.”
这正是她原本预期的答案，不多也不少。她的手伤隐隐作痛，仿佛利刃仍存，越割越深。她遣走仆人，回头看着罗柏。“你有答案了吗？”
It was the reply she had expected, no more and no less. Her hands throbbed with pain, as if the blade were still in her, cutting deep. She sent the servants away and looked back to Robb. “Do you have the answer yet?”
“因为他害怕布兰会醒来，”罗柏道，“害怕他醒来后会说的话或会做的事，害怕他所知道的情况。”
“Someone is afraid Bran might wake up,” Robb said, “afraid of what he might say or do, afraid of something he knows.”
凯特琳替他骄傲。“很好。”她转向新任侍卫队长。“所谓有一就有二，我们得好好保护布兰。”
Catelyn was proud of him. “Very good.” She turned to the new captain of the guard. “We must keep Bran safe. If there was one killer, there could be others.”
“夫人，您要多少守卫？”哈尔①问。
“How many guards do you want, m’lady?” Hal asked.
“如今艾德大人不在，我儿就是临冬城主。”她告诉他。
“So long as Lord Eddard is away, my son is the master of Winterfell,” she told him.
罗柏昂首道：“派一个人守在房里，一个守在门外，不分昼夜，下面楼梯口再派两个。未经我或我母亲的许可，谁也不准接近布兰。”
Robb stood a little taller. “Put one man in the sickroom, night and day, one outside the door, two at the bottom of the stairs. No one sees Bran without my warrant or my mother’s.”
“是的，大人。”
“As you say, m’lord.”
“现在就去办。”凯特琳提议。
“Do it now,” Catelyn suggested.
“让他的狼也待在房里陪他。”罗柏又补了一句。
“And let his wolf stay in the room with him,” Robb added.
“对，”凯特琳说，然后又重复了一遍，“这样很好。”
“Yes,” Catelyn said. And then again: “Yes.”
哈里斯·莫兰点头行礼后离开房间。
Hallis Mollen bowed and left the room.
“史塔克夫人，”侍卫队长离开后，罗德利克爵士问，“您有否注意到刺客行凶用的匕首？”
“Lady Stark,” Ser Rodrik said when the guardsman had gone, “did you chance to notice the dagger the killer used?”
“当时我无暇细看，不过它的锋利我可以确定。”凯特琳苦笑着回答。“为何问这个？”
“The circumstances did not allow me to examine it closely, but I can vouch for its edge,” Catelyn replied with a dry smile. “Why do you ask?”
“刺客死时手里还握着那把匕首，我觉得以他的身份地位不足以使用这么精良的武器，所以花了很长的时间仔细研究。刀刃乃是瓦雷利亚钢打造，刀柄的材质则是龙骨。这样的武器不可能出现在他手中，一定是有人交给他的。”
“We found the knife still in the villain’s grasp. It seemed to me that it was altogether too fine a weapon for such a man, so I looked at it long and hard. The blade is Valyrian steel, the hilt dragonbone. A weapon like that has no business being in the hands of such as him. Someone gave it to him.”
凯特琳颔首沉吟。“罗柏，把门关上。”
Catelyn nodded, thoughtful. “Robb, close the door.”
他眼神怪异地看了看她，随即照办。
He looked at her strangely, but did as she told him.
“当下我要告诉你们的事，绝对不许外传。”她对他们说，“我的怀疑只要有任何一部份属实，那么奈德和我的女儿们便是身陷险境，消息一旦走漏很可能就会要他们的命。因此我需要你们宣誓守密。”
“What I am about to tell you must not leave this room,” she told them. “I want your oaths on that. If even part of what I suspect is true, Ned and my girls have ridden into deadly danger, and a word in the wrong ears could mean their lives.”
“艾德大人待我恩如生父，”葛雷乔伊道，“我誓不泄漏今日所闻。”
“Lord Eddard is a second father to me,” said Theon Greyjoy. “I do so swear.”
“我发誓守密。”鲁温学士说。
“You have my oath,” Maester Luwin said.
“夫人，我也是。”罗德利克爵士应道。
“And mine, my lady,” echoed Ser Rodrik.
她望望儿子。“罗柏，你呢？”
She looked at her son. “And you, Robb?”
他点点头。
He nodded his consent.
“我妹妹莱莎认为她丈夫，也就是前任御前首相琼恩·艾林，是被兰尼斯特家所谋杀。”凯特琳对他们说，“我又想起布兰坠楼当天，詹姆·兰尼斯特并未参加国王的狩猎活动，而是留在城内。”满室死寂。“所以我认定布兰并非失足坠楼，”她平静地说完。“而是被抛下去的。”
“My sister Lysa believes the Lannisters murdered her husband, Lord Arryn, the Hand of the King,” Catelyn told them. “It comes to me that Jaime Lannister did not join the hunt the day Bran fell. He remained here in the castle.” The room was deathly quiet. “I do not think Bran fell from that tower,” she said into the stillness. “I think he was thrown.”
震慑清楚地写在众人脸上。“夫人，这真是耸人听闻，”罗德利克·凯索道，“就算‘弑君者’，恐怕也做不出这种残害无辜幼儿的事。”
The shock was plain on their faces. “My lady, that is a monstrous suggestion,” said Rodrik Cassel. “Even the Kingslayer would flinch at the murder of an innocent child.”
“哦，是吗？”席恩·葛雷乔伊反问，“我却很怀疑。”
“Oh, would he?” Theon Greyjoy asked. “I wonder.”
“以兰尼斯特家的野心和傲慢，没有什么是他们做不出来的。”凯特琳答道。
“There is no limit to Lannister pride or Lannister ambition,” Catelyn said.
“布兰那孩子以前从没出过事，”鲁温学士沉吟，“临冬城的一砖一瓦他全都了如指掌。”
“The boy had always been surehanded in the past,” Maester Luwin said thoughtfully. “He knew every stone in Winterfell.”
“天杀的，”罗柏咒道，他年轻的脸庞蒙上了愤怒的阴影。“这要是真的，他迟早会付出代价。”他抽出佩剑，举在空中挥舞。“我要亲手宰了他！”
“Gods,” Robb swore, his young face dark with anger. “If this is true, he will pay for it.” He drew his sword and waved it in the air. “I’ll kill him myself!”
罗德利克爵士怒道：“把剑收起来！兰尼斯特远在几百里之外，你这蠢小子。我告诫过你多少次了？除非迫不得已，否则绝不要拔剑！”
Ser Rodrik bristled at him. “Put that away! The Lannisters are a hundred leagues away. Never draw your sword unless you mean to use it. How many times must I tell you, foolish boy?”
罗柏羞愧地照办，刹那间又显得孩子气。凯特琳对罗德利克爵士说：“看来我儿已经开始佩戴武器。”
Abashed, Robb sheathed his sword, suddenly a child again. Catelyn said to Ser Rodrik, “I see my son is wearing steel now.”
老教头回答：“我觉得是时候了。”
The old master-at-arms said, “I thought it was time.”
罗柏紧张地望着她。“早该如此。”她说，“临冬城可能很快就要进入紧急戒备，届时木剑是派不上用场的。”
Robb was looking at her anxiously. “Past time,” she said. “Winterfell may have need of all its swords soon, and they had best not be made of wood.”
席恩·葛雷乔伊把手放在自己剑柄上：“夫人，倘若真有战事，我们家族听任差遣。”
Theon Greyjoy put a hand on the hilt of his blade and said, “My lady, if it comes to that, my House owes yours a great debt.”
鲁温学士拉拉颈间被金属项链磨伤的地方。“我们现在一切都只能猜测。被控谋杀的不是别人，正是当今王后的亲弟弟，这事万不能传到她的耳中。除非我们握有证据，否则不可轻举妄动。”
Maester Luwin pulled at his chain collar where it chafed against his neck. “All we have is conjecture. This is the queen’s beloved brother we mean to accuse. She will not take it kindly. We must have proof, or forever keep silent.”
“匕首就是证据，”罗德利克爵士道，“如此精巧的名刀一定有人见过。”
“Your proof is in the dagger,” Ser Rodrik said. “A fine blade like that will not have gone unnoticed.”
凯特琳明白，若要发掘事实真相，惟有一处可去。“有人必须到君临走一趟。”
There was only one place to find the truth of it, Catelyn realized. “Someone must go to King’s Landing.”
“我去。”罗柏道。
“I’ll go,” Robb said.
“不行，”她告诉他，“你要留在这里。无论如何，临冬城都要有史塔克家的人当家。”她看看满脸白须的罗德利克爵士，又看看一身灰袍的鲁温学士，再看看年轻精瘦却冲动莽撞的葛雷乔伊，派谁去好呢？谁最值得信赖？她心里已有了答案。凯特琳挣扎着推开毛毯，只觉裹着绷带的手指僵硬如同磐石，她爬下床。“我亲自去。”
“No,” she told him. “Your place is here. There must always be a Stark in Winterfell.” She looked at Ser Rodrik with his great white whiskers, at Maester Luwin in his grey robes, at young Greyjoy, lean and dark and impetuous. Who to send? Who would be believed? Then she knew. Catelyn struggled to push back the blankets, her bandaged fingers as stiff and unyielding as stone. She climbed out of bed. “I must go myself.”
“夫人，”鲁温学士道，“这样好吗？兰尼斯特家的人一定会对你的出现起疑。”
“My lady,” said Maester Luwin, “is that wise? Surely the Lannisters would greet your arrival with suspicion.”
“布兰怎么办？”罗柏问。这可怜的孩子已困惑得乱了方寸。“你总不能丢下他不管吧？”
“What about Bran?” Robb asked. The poor boy looked utterly confused now. “You can’t mean to leave him.”
“能为他做的我都做了，”她伸出受伤的手放在他臂膀上。“他的性命就交给天上诸神和鲁温师傅。你不也提醒过我吗？罗柏，我还有其他的孩子需要考虑。”
“I have done everything I can for Bran,” she said, laying a wounded hand on his arm. “His life is in the hands of the gods and Maester Luwin. As you reminded me yourself, Robb, I have other children to think of now.”
“夫人，您需要人马护送。”席恩道。
“You will need a strong escort, my lady,” Theon said.
“我叫哈尔带一队守卫随你去。”罗柏说。
“I’ll send Hal with a squad of guardsmen,” Robb said.
“不，”凯特琳说，“大队人马只会惹来不必要的注意。我不希望让兰尼斯特家知道我南下的消息。”
“No,” Catelyn said. “A large party attracts unwelcome attention. I would not have the Lannisters know I am coming.”
罗德利克爵士辩道：“夫人，那么起码让我跟您一道去。国王大道很危险，您一个女人家不方便。”
Ser Rodrik protested. “My lady, let me accompany you at least. The kingsroad can be perilous for a woman alone.”
“我不打算走国王大道。”凯特琳回答。她思量半晌，接着点头表示确定。“两人骑马的话，速度并不比单人慢，却比大队车辆和轮宫快上许多。罗德利克爵士，欢迎你和我同行。我们沿白刃河朝海边走，然后在白港雇船走水路。假如马匹迅速，海风顺畅，我们便可赶在奈德和兰尼斯特家的人之前抵达君临。”到时候，她心里暗想，我们走着瞧。
“I will not be taking the kingsroad,” Catelyn replied. She thought for a moment, then nodded her consent. “Two riders can move as fast as one, and a good deal faster than a long column burdened by wagons and wheel-houses. I will welcome your company, Ser Rodrik. We will follow the White Knife down to the sea, and hire a ship at White Harbor. Strong horses and brisk winds should bring us to King’s Landing well ahead of Ned and the Lannisters.” And then , she thought, we shall see what we shall see .
第十六章 珊莎
*SANSA
早餐的时候，茉丹修女告诉珊莎，艾德·史塔克大人天亮前就离了营。“国王找他去的，我想肯定又是去外面打猎。听说这附近还有野牛出没哪。”
E ddard Stark had left before dawn, Septa Mordane informed Sansa as they broke their fast. “The king sent for him. Another hunt, I do believe. There are still wild aurochs in these lands, I am told.”
“我从没见过野牛。”珊莎喂了块培根给餐桌底下的淑女，冰原狼像王后般优雅地从她手上衔过去。
“I’ve never seen an aurochs,” Sansa said, feeding a piece of bacon to Lady under the table. The direwolf took it from her hand, as delicate as a queen.
茉丹修女不以为然地哼了一声。“好人家的小姐不在用餐时喂狗的。”她掰开一块蜂窝，让蜜滴到面包上。
Septa Mordane sniffed in disapproval. “A noble lady does not feed dogs at her table,” she said, breaking off another piece of comb and letting the honey drip down onto her bread.
“她才不是狗呢，她是冰原狼。”珊莎纠正。淑女伸出粗糙的舌头舔了舔她的手指。“反正父亲大人说小狼可以陪我们作伴。”
“She’s not a dog, she’s a direwolf,” Sansa pointed out as Lady licked her fingers with a rough tongue. “Anyway, Father said we could keep them with us if we want.”
修女看来很不服气。“珊莎，你是个好女孩，但只要一说到那只野东西，你就倔得跟你妹妹艾莉亚一个样。”她皱起眉头，“说到艾莉亚，她这会儿又跑哪儿去了？”
The septa was not appeased. “You’re a good girl, Sansa, but I do vow, when it comes to that creature you’re as willful as your sister Arya.” She scowled. “And where is Arya this morning?”
“她肚子不饿。”珊莎道。她心里很清楚，艾莉亚八成早就溜进厨房，好说歹说地跟哪个厨房小弟讨到一顿丰盛早餐了。
“She wasn’t hungry,” Sansa said, knowing full well that her sister had probably stolen down to the kitchen hours ago and wheedled a breakfast out of some cook’s boy.
“得提醒她今天穿得体面些。那件灰色的天鹅绒衣服不错。王后和弥赛菈公主邀请我们过去一同搭乘轮宫，我们可要表现出最好的一面才行。”
“Do remind her to dress nicely today. The grey velvet, perhaps. We are all invited to ride with the queen and Princess Myrcella in the royal wheelhouse, and we must look our best.”
珊莎的表现已经好得不能再好。她把栗色长发梳得发亮，然后穿上她最好的蓝丝绒礼服。最近这一个多星期，她天天都在盼望今天的到来。能与王后作伴是至高无尚的荣耀，更何况乔佛里可能也在。那可是她的未婚夫呢。虽然他们还要等许多年才会成婚，但每当想到他，她心里总会产生一阵奇怪的悸动。算起来珊莎还根本不了解乔佛里，可她却已经爱上他了。他具有她心目中白马王子的每一项优点，高大英挺，体格强壮，一头漂亮金发。她珍视与他共处的每一个机会，可惜这样的时刻屈指可数。今天她惟一担心的便是艾莉亚。艾莉亚有种把每件事都搞砸的本领，你永远不知道她接下去会闯出什么祸来。“我去跟她讲，”她不太确定地说，“但她爱怎么穿是她的事。”她只能祈祷别太离谱了。“我可以先告退了吗？”
Sansa already looked her best. She had brushed out her long auburn hair until it shone, and picked her nicest blue silks. She had been looking forward to today for more than a week. It was a great honor to ride with the queen, and besides, Prince Joffrey might be there. Her betrothed. Just thinking it made her feel a strange fluttering inside, even though they were not to marry for years and years. Sansa did not really know Joffrey yet, but she was already in love with him. He was all she ever dreamt her prince should be, tall and handsome and strong, with hair like gold. She treasured every chance to spend time with him, few as they were. The only thing that scared her about today was Arya. Arya had a way of ruining everything. You never knew what she would do. “I’ll tell her,” Sansa said uncertainly, “but she’ll dress the way she always does.” She hoped it wouldn’t be too embarrassing. “May I be excused?”
“你去罢。”茉丹修女又拿了一堆面包和蜂蜜，珊莎滑下长凳，跑出旅店大厅，淑女紧跟在后。
“You may.” Septa Mordane helped herself to more bread and honey, and Sansa slid from the bench. Lady followed at her heels as she ran from the inn’s common room.
门外，人们正忙着拆除大小营帐，把东西装上马车，准备新一天的行程。她在叫骂声和木头车轮的嘎吱声中站立了片刻。这是栋占地广阔，白石砌成的三层建筑，珊莎还没见过比这更大的旅馆。即便如此，却只能容纳国王手下不到三分之一的人手。加上她父亲的随从和沿途加入的自由骑手，国王的队伍已经超过了四百人。
Outside, she stood for a moment amidst the shouts and curses and the creak of wooden wheels as the men broke down the tents and pavilions and loaded the wagons for another day’s march. The inn was a sprawling three-story structure of pale stone, the biggest that Sansa had ever seen, but even so, it had accommodations for less than a third of the king’s party, which had swollen to more than four hundred with the addition of her father’s household and the freeriders who had joined them on the road.
她在三叉戟河畔找到了妹妹。艾莉亚正死命按住娜梅莉亚，想把她身上干涸结块的泥巴刷掉，但显然小狼并不领情。艾莉亚身上穿的正是昨天那套皮革马装，她前天穿的也是这套。
She found Arya on the banks of the Trident, trying to hold Nymeria still while she brushed dried mud from her fur. The direwolf was not enjoying the process. Arya was wearing the same riding leathers she had worn yesterday and the day before.
“我看你还是快换件像样的衣服吧，”珊莎对她说。“这可是茉丹修女说的。今天我们要和弥赛菈公主一起搭乘王后的轮宫呢。”
“You better put on something pretty,” Sansa told her. “Septa Mordane said so. We’re traveling in the queen’s wheelhouse with Princess Myrcella today.”
“我不去。”艾莉亚一边说，一边试着把娜梅莉亚身上一撮打结的毛梳整齐。“我跟米凯要骑马到河上游的浅滩去找红宝石。”
“I’m not,” Arya said, trying to brush a tangle out of Nymeria’s matted grey fur. “Mycah and I are going to ride upstream and look for rubies at the ford.”
“红宝石，”珊莎不明白，“什么红宝石？”
“Rubies,” Sansa said, lost. “What rubies?”
艾莉亚白了她一眼，仿佛把她当成蠢蛋。“当然是雷加的红宝石啊。当年劳勃国王就是在那儿杀死他夺得王位的。”
Arya gave her a look like she was so stupid. “Rhaegar’s rubies. This is where King Robert killed him and won the crown.”
珊莎难以置信地望着自己骨瘦如柴的小妹。“不准你去找什么红宝石，公主正等着我们呢，王后邀请的是我们两人。”
Sansa regarded her scrawny little sister in disbelief. “You can’t look for rubies, the princess is expecting us. The queen invited us both.”
“我才不管。”艾莉亚说：“轮宫里连扇窗户都没有，什么也看不见。”
“I don’t care,” Arya said. “The wheelhouse doesn’t even have windows , you can’t see a thing.”
“外面有什么好看？”珊莎不悦地说。对于这次邀请她可是满心期待，但她蠢笨的妹妹却要搞砸一切，正如她所害怕的。“不过是些田地、农场和村落罢了。”
“What could you want to see?” Sansa said, annoyed. She had been thrilled by the invitation, and her stupid sister was going to ruin everything, just as she’d feared. “It’s all just fields and farms and holdfasts.”
“才不是呢。”艾莉亚固执地说，“哪天你跟我们一起去看看就知道了。”
“It is not,” Arya said stubbornly. “If you came with us sometimes, you’d see.”
“我最讨厌骑马了，”珊莎激动地说，“只会溅得一身泥沙，浑身酸麻。”
“I hate riding,” Sansa said fervently. “All it does is get you soiled and dusty and sore.”
艾莉亚耸耸肩。“别动，”她斥责娜梅莉亚。“我不会伤害你的。”然后她转向珊莎说，“不是啦，穿越颈泽的时候，我一共发现了三十六种以前没见过的花，米凯还给我看了一只蜥狮呢。”
Arya shrugged. “Hold still,” she snapped at Nymeria, “I’m not hurting you.” Then to Sansa she said, “When we were crossing the Neck, I counted thirty-six flowers I never saw before, and Mycah showed me a lizard-lion.”
珊莎听了浑身颤抖。他们沿着蜿蜒的堤道，缓慢地通过看似永无止尽的黑色泥泞，一共花了十二天的时间方才穿越颈泽。对于这趟旅程，她可是从头痛恨到尾。那里的空气阴湿黏腻，加上堤道太狭窄，夜里连扎营都没办法，只好停留在国王大道上。长年浸泡在腐沼之中的浓密树丛，从道路两旁朝他们步步进逼，枝干间垂下帘幕般的菌类植物。巨大的花朵盛开在烂泥坑里，漂浮在死水潭上。可假如你愚蠢到想离开堤道去采摘，四处随时有流沙等着将你吞噬。密林里有虎视眈眈的毒蛇，水中有半浮半沉的蜥狮，看起来活像长了眼睛和牙齿的黑木头。
Sansa shuddered. They had been twelve days crossing the Neck, rumbling down a crooked causeway through an endless black bog, and she had hated every moment of it. The air had been damp and clammy, the causeway so narrow they could not even make proper camp at night, they had to stop right on the kingsroad. Dense thickets of half-drowned trees pressed close around them, branches dripping with curtains of pale fungus. Huge flowers bloomed in the mud and floated on pools of stagnant water, but if you were stupid enough to leave the causeway to pluck them, there were quicksands waiting to suck you down, and snakes watching from the trees, and lizard-lions floating half-submerged in the water, like black logs with eyes and teeth.
想也知道，这些全难不倒艾莉亚。有次她居然满脸堆着马一样的笑容，头发乱成一团，衣服全是泥泞，拎了一束烂兮兮的紫绿花朵回来送给爸爸。珊莎一直希望哪天父亲大人会叫艾莉亚注意礼节，有点她应有的淑女模样，可他从没这么做过，这一次，他反而拥抱她并感谢那些花。简直就是火上浇油。
None of which stopped Arya, of course. One day she came back grinning her horsey grin, her hair all tangled and her clothes covered in mud, clutching a raggedy bunch of purple and green flowers for Father. Sansa kept hoping he would tell Arya to behave herself and act like the highborn lady she was supposed to be, but he never did, he only hugged her and thanked her for the flowers. That just made her worse.
事后大家才知道，那些紫花叫做“毒吻花”，而艾莉亚的双臂果然都起了红疹子。珊莎本以为这次的教训够她受了，没想到艾莉亚却只是笑笑，隔天一听她那朋友米凯说涂上烂泥可以减轻疼痛，便立刻照办，把自己弄得活像个未开化的沼泽女人。这还不止，晚上妹妹脱衣服睡觉时，珊莎注意到她的手臂和肩膀上有不少擦伤，深紫的瘀青和褪色的黄绿色脏东西。这些究竟是她打哪儿弄来的，恐怕就只有天上的七神知道了。
Then it turned out the purple flowers were called poison kisses , and Arya got a rash on her arms. Sansa would have thought that might have taught her a lesson, but Arya laughed about it, and the next day she rubbed mud all over her arms like some ignorant bog woman just because her friend Mycah told her it would stop the itching. She had bruises on her arms and shoulders too, dark purple welts and faded green-and-yellow splotches; Sansa had seen them when her sister undressed for sleep. How she had gotten those only the seven gods knew.
瞧她现在吧，艾莉亚仍旧没完没了，一边梳理娜梅莉亚的毛团，一边絮絮叨叨这次南下的所见所闻。“上星期我们找到一座很阴森的瞭望塔，昨天我们才追赶了一大群野马。你真该来看看他们一闻到娜梅莉亚拔腿就跑的模样。”小狼在她的魔掌下扭个不停，艾莉亚又叱道：“别闹，还有一边要弄呢，瞧你全身都是泥巴。”
Arya was still going on, brushing out Nymeria’s tangles and chattering about things she’d seen on the trek south. “Last week we found this haunted watchtower, and the day before we chased a herd of wild horses. You should have seen them run when they caught a scent of Nymeria.” The wolf wriggled in her grasp and Arya scolded her. “Stop that, I have to do the other side, you’re all muddy.”
“你不该擅自脱队，”珊莎提醒她，“父亲大人说过的。”
“You’re not supposed to leave the column,” Sansa reminded her. “Father said so.”
艾莉亚一耸肩：“我又没跑远。反正有娜梅莉亚陪在身边。况且我也不是每次都脱队，有时候跟着货车一起走，到处串串门子也挺有意思。”
Arya shrugged. “I didn’t go far. Anyway, Nymeria was with me the whole time. I don’t always go off, either. Sometimes it’s fun just to ride along with the wagons and talk to people.”
艾莉亚专门结交哪些人，珊莎太清楚了：侍从、马夫与女仆，老头子和不穿衣服的小孩，还有满嘴粗话，出身低贱的自由骑手。艾莉亚跟任何人都能做朋友，而这米凯是最糟糕的一个：他是个屠夫的学徒，十三岁，野得很，躺在运肉的货车上，闻起来活像只待宰的猪。光瞧见他就足以令珊莎作呕，谁知艾莉亚却宁可与他为伍。
Sansa knew all about the sorts of people Arya liked to talk to: squires and grooms and serving girls, old men and naked children, rough-spoken freeriders of uncertain birth. Arya would make friends with anybody . This Mycah was the worst; a butcher’s boy, thirteen and wild, he slept in the meat wagon and smelled of the slaughtering block. Just the sight of him was enough to make Sansa feel sick, but Arya seemed to prefer his company to hers.
珊莎觉得自己快要失去耐性。“你一定要跟我去，”她语气坚定地告诉妹妹，“你不能拒绝王后的邀请，茉丹修女正等着你呢。”
Sansa was running out of patience now. “You have to come with me,” she told her sister firmly. “You can’t refuse the queen. Septa Mordane will expect you.”
艾莉亚充耳不闻，她突然猛力一刷，娜梅莉亚吃痛，低吼一声，扭头便跑。“你给我回来！”
Arya ignored her. She gave a hard yank with the brush. Nymeria growled and spun away, affronted. “Come back here!”
“等下有柠檬蛋糕和茶可吃喔，”珊莎继续说，摆出一副大人说理的口吻。淑女蹭了蹭她的脚，珊莎用她喜欢的方式帮她搔搔耳朵，淑女便后脚蹲地，在她身边坐了下来，看着艾莉亚追赶娜梅莉亚。“当你可以舒舒服服靠着羽毛枕头，和王后一起享受蛋糕时，怎么会想骑着臭马，弄得四肢酸痛，满身大汗呢？”
“There’s going to be lemon cakes and tea,” Sansa went on, all adult and reasonable. Lady brushed against her leg. Sansa scratched her ears the way she liked, and Lady sat beside her on her haunches, watching Arya chase Nymeria. “Why would you want to ride a smelly old horse and get all sore and sweaty when you could recline on feather pillows and eat cakes with the queen?”
“我不喜欢王后。”艾莉亚随口道。珊莎听了倒抽一口冷气，即便是由艾莉亚口中说出来，她仍旧十分震惊。但艾莉亚却满不在乎地继续下去，“她连让我带娜梅莉亚都不准。”她把梳子往腰带里一插，偷偷地朝她的小狼走去。娜梅莉亚小心翼翼地看着她逼近。
“I don’t like the queen,” Arya said casually. Sansa sucked in her breath, shocked that even Arya would say such a thing, but her sister prattled on, heedless. “She won’t even let me bring Nymeria.” She thrust the brush under her belt and stalked her wolf. Nymeria watched her approach warily.
“御用轮宫本来就不是让狼撒野的地方。”珊莎说，“而且你也知道弥赛菈公主很怕它们。”
“A royal wheelhouse is no place for a wolf,” Sansa said. “And Princess Myrcella is afraid of them, you know that.”
“弥赛是个小娃娃。”艾莉亚一把攫住娜梅莉亚的脖子，可她才拔出梳子，冰原狼便使劲一扭逃开了。艾莉亚气得丢下梳子。“你这个大坏蛋！”她吼道。
“Myrcella is a little baby.” Arya grabbed Nymeria around her neck, but the moment she pulled out the brush again the direwolf wriggled free and bounded off. Frustrated, Arya threw down the brush. “Bad wolf!” she shouted.
珊莎不禁微笑。以前临冬城里的驯兽长法兰曾对她说过，有什么样的主人就会养出什么样的动物。她轻轻抱了淑女一下，淑女舔舔她的脸颊，珊莎咯咯直笑。艾莉亚听见笑声，转身怒视道：“我不管你怎么说，我就是要去骑马。”她那张又长又顽固的马脸露出一种即将任性而为的表情。
Sansa couldn’t help but smile a little. The kennelmaster once told her that an animal takes after its master. She gave Lady a quick little hug. Lady licked her cheek. Sansa giggled. Arya heard and whirled around, glaring. “I don’t care what you say, I’m going out riding.” Her long horsey face got the stubborn look that meant she was going to do something willful.
“老天爷，艾莉亚，有时候你才真像个小孩子。”珊莎道，“那我就自己去啰。你不去更好，这样我和淑女就可以把所有的柠檬蛋糕吃完，好好享受美好时光。”
“Gods be true, Arya, sometimes you act like such a child,” Sansa said. “I’ll go by myself then. It will be ever so much nicer that way. Lady and I will eat all the lemon cakes and just have the best time without you.”
她转身要走，艾莉亚却在她身后叫道：“他们也不会让你带上淑女的。”珊莎还没想好如何回嘴，她便沿着河岸追赶娜梅莉亚，跑得不见人影了。
She turned to walk off, but Arya shouted after her, “They won’t let you bring Lady either.” She was gone before Sansa could think of a reply, chasing Nymeria along the river.
珊莎觉得既孤单又羞愤，只好独自返回下榻的旅店，她知道茉丹修女一定在等她。淑女静静地走在她身边，走着走着，她的眼泪便掉了下来。她只不过希望一切都像歌谣里描绘的那样顺利美好，为何艾莉亚偏偏不能当个甜美优雅又善良的好女孩，像弥赛菈公主那样呢？有个那样的妹妹该有多好啊。
Alone and humiliated, Sansa took the long way back to the inn, where she knew Septa Mordane would be waiting. Lady padded quietly by her side. She was almost in tears. All she wanted was for things to be nice and pretty, the way they were in the songs. Why couldn’t Arya be sweet and delicate and kind, like Princess Myrcella? She would have liked a sister like that.
珊莎怎么也想不透，年龄仅仅相差两岁的姐妹，个性怎么会差那么多。艾莉亚要是个私生女就好了，就像她们的私生子哥哥琼恩。说老实话，艾莉亚连长相都跟琼恩非常神似，两人都有史塔克家的长脸和棕发，却完全没有他们母亲的容貌、肤色与头发。听别人闲话，琼恩的妈妈不过是一介平民而已。珊莎小时候，有一次忍不住问母亲是否弄错了，会不会是什么古灵精怪把她真正的妹妹给抱走了？但母亲只笑笑，然后说没这回事，艾莉亚的确是她女儿，也是珊莎的亲妹妹。珊莎想不出母亲有什么理由要骗她，便把她的话当真了。
Sansa could never understand how two sisters, born only two years apart, could be so different. It would have been easier if Arya had been a bastard, like their half brother Jon. She even looked like Jon, with the long face and brown hair of the Starks, and nothing of their lady mother in her face or her coloring. And Jon’s mother had been common , or so people whispered. Once, when she was littler, Sansa had even asked Mother if perhaps there hadn’t been some mistake. Perhaps the grumkins had stolen her real sister. But Mother had only laughed and said no, Arya was her daughter and Sansa’s trueborn sister, blood of their blood. Sansa could not think why Mother would want to lie about it, so she supposed it had to be true.
好在走近营地，方才的种种不快都被她抛在脑后。王后的行宫外正聚集了一群人，珊莎听见他们兴奋地交谈，像是一大群蜜蜂嗡嗡作响。行宫的大门敞开，王后站在木头阶梯的最上层，对着人群里的某人微笑。珊莎听见她说：“两位大人，重臣们真是太周到了。”
As she neared the center of camp, her distress was quickly forgotten. A crowd had gathered around the queen’s wheelhouse. Sansa heard excited voices buzzing like a hive of bees. The doors had been thrown open, she saw, and the queen stood at the top of the wooden steps, smiling down at someone. She heard her saying, “The council does us great honor, my good lords.”
“发生了什么事？”她问一个认识的侍从。
“What’s happening?” she asked a squire she knew.
“御前会议派人从君临来迎接我们，”他告诉她，“为国王派出的荣誉护卫。”
“The council sent riders from King’s Landing to escort us the rest of the way,” he told her. “An honor guard for the king.”
珊莎迫不及待想瞧瞧，便让淑女走在前面开路。人们见了冰原狼纷纷躲避。等她靠得够近，只见两名骑士单膝跪在王后面前，他们的铠甲做工之精细华丽，使她目炫神迷。
Anxious to see, Sansa let Lady clear a path through the crowd. People moved aside hastily for the direwolf. When she got closer, she saw two knights kneeling before the queen, in armor so fine and gorgeous that it made her blink.
其中一名骑士穿了一套雕工繁复，上了瓷釉的白鳞甲，灿烂得活像一片覆盖初雪的洁白大地，白色银线和钩扣在阳光下熠熠发光。待他取下头盔，珊莎才发现他原是个老人，一头白发和他的铠甲颜色一般。虽然如此，他看起来却老当益壮，一举一动甚是优雅。他的双肩垂系着象征御林铁卫的纯白披风。
One knight wore an intricate suit of white enameled scales, brilliant as a field of new-fallen snow, with silver chasings and clasps that glittered in the sun. When he removed his helm, Sansa saw that he was an old man with hair as pale as his armor, yet he seemed strong and graceful for all that. From his shoulders hung the pure white cloak of the Kingsguard.
他的同伴年约二十，一身精钢打造的深绿铠甲，绿如密林。他是珊莎所见过的最英俊的男子，体格高大魁梧，黑玉般的及肩长发衬托出他修整干净的脸庞，那双带着笑意的蓝眼，正好与盔甲的颜色交相辉映。他怀抱一顶鹿角盔，两只华丽的鹿角金光闪闪。
His companion was a man near twenty whose armor was steel plate of a deep forest-green. He was the handsomest man Sansa had ever set eyes upon; tall and powerfully made, with jet-black hair that fell to his shoulders and framed a clean-shaven face, and laughing green eyes to match his armor. Cradled under one arm was an antlered helm, its magnificent rack shimmering in gold.
珊莎起初没注意到第三个陌生人。他形容憔悴，神情冷酷，并未像其他人一样屈膝下跪，而是独自站在他们的坐骑旁，默默地观望。此人满脸麻子，没有胡须，两眼深邃，面颊凹陷。虽然并不老，头发却没剩几根，只在双耳上面冒出几撮，不过他把这些仅存的头发留得跟女人家一样长。他硬皮衣外罩上铁灰色的锁子甲，虽式样平凡，毫无装饰，却历尽沧桑，看得出岁月的痕迹。在他右肩之后，可以见到一把脏污的皮革剑柄，大抵是他的双手巨剑太长，没法佩在腰间。
At first Sansa did not notice the third stranger. He did not kneel with the others. He stood to one side, beside their horses, a gaunt grim man who watched the proceedings in silence. His face was pockmarked and beardless, with deepset eyes and hollow cheeks. Though he was not an old man, only a few wisps of hair remained to him, sprouting above his ears, but those he had grown long as a woman’s. His armor was iron-grey chainmail over layers of boiled leather, plain and unadorned, and it spoke of age and hard use. Above his right shoulder the stained leather hilt of the blade strapped to his back was visible; a two-handed greatsword, too long to be worn at his side.
“国王外出打猎，等他回来见到你们，定会大感欣慰。”王后正对眼前跪着的两名骑士说话，但珊莎的视线却始终离不开第三个人。他似乎也察觉到她凝视的压力，缓缓地转过头来。淑女向他咆哮，珊莎·史塔克只觉一种前所未有的恐惧排山倒海地将她淹没。她踉跄后退，结果撞到了别人。
“The king is gone hunting, but I know he will be pleased to see you when he returns,” the queen was saying to the two knights who knelt before her, but Sansa could not take her eyes off the third man. He seemed to feel the weight of her gaze. Slowly he turned his head. Lady growled. A terror as overwhelming as anything Sansa Stark had ever felt filled her suddenly. She stepped backward and bumped into someone.
一双强而有力的手稳住她的肩膀，珊莎起初以为是父亲，但待她回头，朝下看着她的却是桑铎·克里冈那张烧烂的脸，他的嘴角似笑非笑。“你在发抖啊，小妹妹。”他粗声道，“我有这么可怕么？”
Strong hands grasped her by the shoulders, and for a moment Sansa thought it was her father, but when she turned, it was the burned face of Sandor Clegane looking down at her, his mouth twisted in a terrible mockery of a smile. “You are shaking, girl,” he said, his voice rasping. “Do I frighten you so much?”
他真的就那么可怕，自从珊莎初次看到那张被火毁容的脸以来，始终这么骇人。虽然如此，此际珊莎对他的恐惧却远不及对另一个人的一半。但她还是挣脱了他的掌握，“猎狗”哈哈大笑，淑女挤进两人中间，发出一阵低吼。珊莎蹲下去双手抱住小狼。这时他们反成了四周注目的焦点，她可以感觉到大家的视线都停留在自己身上，还听见此起彼落的窃窃私语和笑声。
He did, and had since she had first laid eyes on the ruin that fire had made of his face, though it seemed to her now that he was not half so terrifying as the other. Still, Sansa wrenched away from him, and the Hound laughed, and Lady moved between them, rumbling a warning. Sansa dropped to her knees to wrap her arms around the wolf. They were all gathered around gaping, she could feel their eyes on her, and here and there she heard muttered comments and titters of laughter.
“是只狼呀。”有人说，然后又有人说，“见鬼，那是冰原狼。”先前那个人接口问，“它在这儿干嘛？”这时“猎狗”厉声回答，“史塔克家的人养狼当保姆。”珊莎这才发现先前那两位陌生的骑士正手里持剑俯视着她和淑女。这下她越发惧怕，更觉羞耻，泪水充满了眼眶。
“A wolf,” a man said, and someone else said, “Seven hells, that’s a direwolf,” and the first man said, “What’s it doing in camp?” and the Hound’s rasping voice replied, “The Starks use them for wet nurses,” and Sansa realized that the two stranger knights were looking down on her and Lady, swords in their hands, and then she was frightened again, and ashamed. Tears filled her eyes.
她听见王后说：“乔佛里，快去保护她。”
She heard the queen say, “Joffrey, go to her.”
然后她的白马王子就出现在她身边了。
And her prince was there.
“不准欺负她。”乔佛里道。他站在她身旁，穿着一身漂亮的蓝色羊毛衣和黑皮革外套，满头金发宛如艳阳下的王冠。他伸手搀扶她起身。“亲爱的小姐，你怎么了？你在怕什么呢？这儿没人会伤害你的。你们通通把剑收起来，这只狼不过是她的小宠物罢了，没什么好大惊小怪的。”他看看桑铎·克里冈。“还有你这只狗，滚远点罢，你吓到我的未婚妻了。”
“Leave her alone,” Joffrey said. He stood over her, beautiful in blue wool and black leather, his golden curls shining in the sun like a crown. He gave her his hand, drew her to her feet. “What is it, sweet lady? Why are you afraid? No one will hurt you. Put away your swords, all of you. The wolf is her little pet, that’s all.” He looked at Sandor Clegane. “And you, dog, away with you, you’re scaring my betrothed.”
向来忠心耿耿的“猎狗”鞠了个躬，安静地穿过人群离开。珊莎勉强站稳脚步，觉得自己活像个蠢蛋。她可是堂堂临冬城史塔克家族的大小姐，有朝一日还要做王后的呢。“王子殿下，我怕的不是他。”她试图解释，“是另外那位。”
The Hound, ever faithful, bowed and slid away quietly through the press. Sansa struggled to steady herself. She felt like such a fool. She was a Stark of Winterfell, a noble lady, and someday she would be a queen. “It was not him, my sweet prince,” she tried to explain. “It was the other one.”
两位新来的骑士互望一眼。“派恩吗？”穿着绿甲的年轻人笑问。
The two stranger knights exchanged a look. “Payne?” chuckled the young man in the green armor.
身着白甲的老人温柔地对珊莎说：“好小姐，有时连我见了伊林爵士也会怕。他看起来的确挺吓人的。”
The older man in white spoke to Sansa gently. “Ofttimes Ser Ilyn frightens me as well, sweet lady. He has a fearsome aspect.”
“本该如此。”王后说着步下轮宫，围观的人群纷纷让路。“国王的御前执法官就是要让坏人惧怕，否则便表示你选择的人并不胜任。”
“As well he should.” The queen had descended from the wheelhouse. The spectators parted to make way for her. “If the wicked do not fear the King’s Justice, you have put the wrong man in the office.”
珊莎总算想到该如何应对。“这么说您肯定找对人了，王后陛下。”她说。四周立时响起一阵哄笑。
Sansa finally found her words. “Then surely you have chosen the right one, Your Grace,” she said, and a gale of laughter erupted all around her.
“小妹妹，这话说得好。”白衣老人道，“果然不愧是艾德·史塔克的掌上明珠。我很荣幸认识你，虽然这次的会面有些离奇。我乃御林铁卫的巴利斯坦·赛尔弥爵士。”
“Well spoken, child,” said the old man in white. “As befits the daughter of Eddard Stark. I am honored to know you, however irregular the manner of our meeting. I am Ser Barristan Selmy, of the Kingsguard.” He bowed.
珊莎知道这个名字，此时茉丹修女多年来的悉心调教派上了用场。“您是御林铁卫队长，”她说：“是吾王劳勃的朝廷重臣和以前伊里斯·坦格利安的御林铁卫。尊贵的骑士，认识您是我的荣幸。即便身处遥远的北方，诗人依旧歌颂‘无畏的’巴利斯坦的丰功伟绩。”
Sansa knew the name, and now the courtesies that Septa Mordane had taught her over the years came back to her. “The Lord Commander of the Kingsguard,” she said, “and councillor to Robert our king and to Aerys Targaryen before him. The honor is mine, good knight. Even in the far north, the singers praise the deeds of Barristan the Bold.”
绿甲骑士又笑了，“应该是‘老迈的’巴利斯坦才对。小妹妹，马屁可别拍过头，这家伙已经够自命不凡了。”他朝她微笑，“小狼女，如果你也说得出我是谁，我才真相信你是我们首相的女儿。”
The green knight laughed again. “Barristan the Old, you mean. Don’t flatter him too sweetly, child, he thinks overmuch of himself already.” He smiled at her. “Now, wolf girl, if you can put a name to me as well, then I must concede that you are truly our Hand’s daughter.”
在她身边的乔佛里挺直身子：“称呼我未婚妻的时候客气点。”
Joffrey stiffened beside her. “Have a care how you address my betrothed.”
“我说得出的。”珊莎连忙接口，企图缓和王子的怒意。她对绿甲骑士笑道：“大人，您的头盔上有两只金色鹿角，这是王室的标志。劳勃国王有两个弟弟，而您又这么年轻，只可能是风息堡公爵和朝廷重臣蓝礼·拜拉席恩，我说的可对？”
“I can answer,” Sansa said quickly, to quell her prince’s anger. She smiled at the green knight. “Your helmet bears golden antlers, my lord. The stag is the sigil of the royal House. King Robert has two brothers. By your extreme youth, you can only be Renly Baratheon, Lord of Storm’s End and councillor to the king, and so I name you.”
巴利斯坦爵士忍俊不禁：“他年纪这么轻，只可能是个没礼貌的捣蛋鬼，像我这么说才对。”
Ser Barristan chuckled. “By his extreme youth, he can only be a prancing jackanapes, and so I name him.”
蓝礼公爵听了哈哈大笑，旁人也随声附和，几分钟前的紧张气氛消失无踪，珊莎也渐渐觉得舒坦……直到伊林·派恩爵士挤开两个人，毫无笑容，一言不发地站到她面前。淑女露出利齿咆哮，吼声中充满敌意，但这回珊莎轻拍她的头，要她安静。“伊林爵士，假如我冒犯到您的话，我很抱歉。”
There was general laughter, led by Lord Renly himself. The tension of a few moments ago was gone, and Sansa was beginning to feel comfortable … until Ser Ilyn Payne shouldered two men aside, and stood before her, unsmiling. He did not say a word. Lady bared her teeth and began to growl, a low rumble full of menace, but this time Sansa silenced the wolf with a gentle hand to the head. “I am sorry if I offended you, Ser Ilyn,” she said.
她等着对方的回答，却始终没有等到。刽子手就这么看着她，他那双苍白无色的眼睛仿佛能褪去她每一件衣服，剥开肌肤，直到她的灵魂赤裸裸地呈现在他面前。最后他转身离去，依然未吐半字。
She waited for an answer, but none came. As the headsman looked at her, his pale colorless eyes seemed to strip the clothes away from her, and then the skin, leaving her soul naked before him. Still silent, he turned and walked away.
珊莎不懂这是怎么回事，于是转头向她的王子求助：“王子殿下，我做错了什么？为何他不愿跟我说话？”
Sansa did not understand. She looked at her prince. “Did I say something wrong, Your Grace? Why will he not speak to me?”
“咱们伊林爵士这十六年来似乎都不爱讲话哦。”蓝礼公爵挂着一抹促狭的笑容解释。
“Ser Ilyn has not been feeling talkative these past fourteen years,” Lord Renly commented with a sly smile.
乔佛里非常嫌恶地看了他叔叔一眼，执起珊莎的纤纤玉手。“伊里斯·坦格利安叫人用烧红的钳子把他舌头给拔了。”
Joffrey gave his uncle a look of pure loathing, then took Sansa’s hands in his own. “Aerys Targaryen had his tongue ripped out with hot pincers.”
“如今他改用剑说话，”王后道，“爵士先生精忠报国，其操守无庸置疑。”然后她满脸堆欢，“珊莎，今日我要和这几位爵爷商谈国事，顺便等国王和你父亲回来。恐怕你和弥赛菈的约定要延期了，请代我向你的好妹妹致上歉意。乔佛里，或许你今天愿意陪陪我们这位贵客？”
“He speaks most eloquently with his sword, however,” the queen said, “and his devotion to our realm is unquestioned.” Then she smiled graciously and said, “Sansa, the good councillors and I must speak together until the king returns with your father. I fear we shall have to postpone your day with Myrcella. Please give your sweet sister my apologies. Joffrey, perhaps you would be so kind as to entertain our guest today.”
“母亲大人，那是我的荣幸。”乔佛里郑重其事地说，他挽起她的手，领她离开轮宫，珊莎顿时觉得幸福得飞上了天。和她的白马王子相处一整天！她崇拜地望着乔佛里，想起他方才把她自伊林爵士和“猎狗”手中拯救出来的样子，要多勇敢有多勇敢，简直就像诗歌里写的一样，就像“镜盾”萨文击败巨人救出戴丽莎公主；或是“龙骑士”伊蒙王子为了破除谣言，保护奈丽诗王后名节，与邪恶的莫格尔爵士决战的故事。
“It would be my pleasure, Mother,” Joffrey said very formally. He took her by the arm and led her away from the wheelhouse, and Sansa’s spirits took flight. A whole day with her prince! She gazed at Joffrey worshipfully. He was so gallant, she thought. The way he had rescued her from Ser Ilyn and the Hound, why, it was almost like the songs, like the time Serwyn of the Mirror Shield saved the Princess Daeryssa from the giants, or Prince Aemon the Dragonknight championing Queen Naerys’s honor against evil Ser Morgil’s slanders.
乔佛里隔着衣袖的碰触更让她心跳加速。“你想做点什么呢？”
The touch of Joffrey’s hand on her sleeve made her heart beat faster. “What would you like to do?”
我只想和你在一起啊，珊莎心想，但她说：“王子殿下，您想做什么，我就做什么。”
Be with you , Sansa thought, but she said, “Whatever you’d like to do, my prince.”
乔佛里想了想。“我们可以去骑马。”
Joffrey reflected a moment. “We could go riding.”
“噢，我最喜欢骑马了。”珊莎道。
“Oh, I love riding,” Sansa said.
乔佛里回头看看跟在他们身后的淑女。“你的狼会吓着马，而我的狗好像也吓着了你，不如我们把他们都留在这儿，自己出去玩，你看怎么样？”
Joffrey glanced back at Lady, who was following at their heels. “Your wolf is liable to frighten the horses, and my dog seems to frighten you. Let us leave them both behind and set off on our own, what do you say?”
珊莎迟疑了一会儿。“您觉得好就好，”她犹豫道，“我想我得先把淑女拴起来。”可她还有些地方没听懂。“其实我不知道您养了狗……”
Sansa hesitated. “If you like,” she said uncertainly. “I suppose I could tie Lady up.” She did not quite understand, though. “I didn’t know you had a dog …”
乔佛里笑道：“他是我妈的狗，她叫他负责保护我，他就这么跟着我了。”
Joffrey laughed. “He’s my mother’s dog, in truth. She has set him to guard me, and so he does.”
“原来您指的是‘猎狗’。”她边说边懊恼自己反应迟钝，假如她是个笨蛋，那么王子是决计不会爱她的。“这样做好吗？”
“You mean the Hound,” she said. She wanted to hit herself for being so slow. Her prince would never love her if she seemed stupid. “Is it safe to leave him behind?”
乔佛里王子听了似乎有点不高兴。“小姐，用不着害怕，我都快成年了，我可不像你哥哥只会用木头剑，我有这个。”他抽出佩剑给珊莎看。那是把经过巧妙微缩，恰好适合十二岁男孩需要的长剑，剑身是用精钢打造，泛着蓝光，两面开刃，剑柄裹着皮革，尾端则是一个黄金做的狮头。珊莎看得连声赞叹，乔佛里相当满意。“我叫它‘狮牙’。”
Prince Joffrey looked annoyed that she would even ask. “Have no fear, lady. I am almost a man grown, and I don’t fight with wood like your brothers. All I need is this.” He drew his sword and showed it to her; a longsword adroitly shrunken to suit a boy of twelve, gleaming blue steel, castle-forged and double-edged, with a leather grip and a lion’s-head pommel in gold. Sansa exclaimed over it admiringly, and Joffrey looked pleased. “I call it Lion’s Tooth,” he said.
于是他们把冰原狼和保镖抛在脑后，沿着三叉戟河北岸往西行去，除了‘狮牙’以外，没有别的同伴。
And so they left her direwolf and his bodyguard behind them, while they ranged east along the north bank of the Trident with no company save Lion’s Tooth.
这是个神奇而灿烂的日子，温暖的空气里弥漫花香，这儿的树林有种珊莎在北方的林子从未见到的柔和之美。乔佛里王子的坐骑是匹箭步如飞的红鬃骏马，他驾驭马儿的方式更是横冲直撞，速度极快，珊莎必须死命驱赶胯下母马才能跟上。今天也是个适合冒险的日子。他们沿着河岸搜索洞穴，把一只影子山猫赶回巢穴。肚子饿的时候，乔佛里循着炊烟找到乡间庄园，吩咐他们为王子和他的同行女士准备食物和葡萄酒。于是他们享用了刚从河里捕来的新鲜鳟鱼，珊莎则一辈子没喝过这么多酒。“父亲大人只准我们喝一杯，而且只能在宴会上。”
It was a glorious day, a magical day. The air was warm and heavy with the scent of flowers, and the woods here had a gentle beauty that Sansa had never seen in the north. Prince Joffrey’s mount was a blood bay courser, swift as the wind, and he rode it with reckless abandon, so fast that Sansa was hard-pressed to keep up on her mare. It was a day for adventures. They explored the caves by the riverbank, and tracked a shadowcat to its lair, and when they grew hungry, Joffrey found a holdfast by its smoke and told them to fetch food and wine for their prince and his lady. They dined on trout fresh from the river, and Sansa drank more wine than she had ever drunk before. “My father only lets us have one cup, and only at feasts,” she confessed to her prince.
“我的未婚妻爱喝多少就喝多少。”乔佛里边说边为她斟满酒杯。
“My betrothed can drink as much as she wants,” Joffrey said, refilling her cup.
酒足饭饱后，他们策马缓行。乔佛里唱歌给她听，他的嗓音高亢甜美、纯净无瑕。珊莎喝多了酒，觉得有点晕眩。“我们是不是该回去了？”她问。
They went more slowly after they had eaten. Joffrey sang for her as they rode, his voice high and sweet and pure. Sansa was a little dizzy from the wine. “Shouldn’t we be starting back?” she asked.
“再等一会。”乔佛里道，“古战场就在前面，绿叉河转弯的地方。你知道罢，那便是我父亲杀死雷加·坦格利安的地方。他一挥手就敲碎对方的胸膛，咯啦，铠甲打得稀烂。”乔佛里挥舞着假想的战锤向珊莎示范。“后来我舅舅詹姆杀掉老伊里斯，我爸就当上了国王。咦，那是什么声音？”
“Soon,” Joffrey said. “The battleground is right up ahead, where the river bends. That was where my father killed Rhaegar Targaryen, you know. He smashed in his chest, crunch , right through the armor.” Joffrey swung an imaginary warhammer to show her how it was done. “Then my uncle Jaime killed old Aerys, and my father was king. What’s that sound?”
珊莎也听到从林子里传来阵阵木头敲击。喀啦喀啦喀啦。“我不知道，”她说，但心里却紧张起来。“乔佛里，我们回去吧。”
Sansa heard it too, floating through the woods, a kind of wooden clattering, snack snack snack . “I don’t know,” she said. It made her nervous, though. “Joffrey, let’s go back.”
“我要瞧个究竟。”乔佛里掉转马头，朝声音的来源骑去，珊莎迫不得已，只好跟上。噪音越来越大，也越来越清晰，的确是木头碰撞的声响。待他们骑得更近，还听见沉重的喘气和隔三差五的闷哼。
“I want to see what it is.” Joffrey turned his horse in the direction of the sounds, and Sansa had no choice but to follow. The noises grew louder and more distinct, the clack of wood on wood, and as they grew closer they heard heavy breathing as well, and now and then a grunt.
“那儿有人。”珊莎不安地说。她发现自己想着淑女，盼望她的冰原狼此刻陪在身边。
“Someone’s there,” Sansa said anxiously. She found herself thinking of Lady, wishing the direwolf was with her.
“有我在不用怕。”乔佛里从剑鞘里拔出‘狮牙’，金属和皮革的摩擦却让她浑身颤抖。“走这边。”说着他策马穿过一排树林。
“You’re safe with me.” Joffrey drew his Lion’s Tooth from its sheath. The sound of steel on leather made her tremble. “This way,” he said, riding through a stand of trees.
树林那端有片空地，地势恰好俯瞰河流。他们在这里找到一对正玩着骑士游戏的男孩女孩，两人正以木棍（其实是扫帚杆）为剑，在草地上横冲直撞，精力充沛地相互砍杀。男孩的年龄要大几岁，个子则足足高出一头，体格也强壮许多，处于发动攻势的一方。女孩一身干瘦，穿着脏兮兮的皮衣，正手忙脚乱地抵挡男孩的攻击，却无法完全避开。当她试图反击时，被对方用剑挡住，并将她的剑往旁一扫，顺势用力劈她手指。她痛得立刻丢下武器大叫。
Beyond, in a clearing overlooking the river, they came upon a boy and a girl playing at knights. Their swords were wooden sticks, broom handles from the look of them, and they were rushing across the grass, swinging at each other lustily. The boy was years older, a head taller, and much stronger, and he was pressing the attack. The girl, a scrawny thing in soiled leathers, was dodging and managing to get her stick in the way of most of the boy’s blows, but not all. When she tried to lunge at him, he caught her stick with his own, swept it aside, and slid his wood down hard on her fingers. She cried out and lost her weapon.
乔佛里王子哈哈大笑。男孩睁大眼睛吃惊地转过头来，随即一松手，木棍落地。女孩瞪着他们，一边吮着指关节想把刺吸出来，珊莎吓坏了。“艾莉亚，是你吗？”她难以置信地惊呼道。
Prince Joffrey laughed. The boy looked around, wide-eyed and startled, and dropped his stick in the grass. The girl glared at them, sucking on her knuckles to take the sting out, and Sansa was horrified. “Arya?” she called out incredulously.
“走开。”艾莉亚眼里满是愤怒的泪水，大声地朝他们嚷嚷，“你们来这里做什么？不要管我们的事。”
“Go away,” Arya shouted back at them, angry tears in her eyes. “What are you doing here? Leave us alone.”
乔佛里看看艾莉亚，又看看珊莎，目光扫了几遍。“这是你妹妹？”珊莎红着脸点头。乔佛里转而仔细审视那名男孩，他是个满脸雀斑，一头浓密红发的丑陋少年。“小子，你又是谁？”他以命令的口吻问，丝毫没在意对方年纪还大他一岁。
Joffrey glanced from Arya to Sansa and back again. “Your sister?” She nodded, blushing. Joffrey examined the boy, an ungainly lad with a coarse, freckled face and thick red hair. “And who are you, boy?” he asked in a commanding tone that took no notice of the fact that the other was a year his senior.
“我叫米凯，”男孩低声说，他认出眼前的王子，连忙移开视线。“王子殿下。”
“Mycah,” the boy muttered. He recognized the prince and averted his eyes. “M’lord.”
“他是屠夫的学徒。”珊莎解释说。
“He’s the butcher’s boy,” Sansa said.
“他是我朋友，”艾莉亚语气尖锐地道，“你们别欺负他。”
“He’s my friend,” Arya said sharply. “You leave him alone.”
“杀猪小弟也想当骑士，是吗？”乔佛里翻身下马，手中握剑。“屠夫小弟，把你的剑捡起来。”他眼里闪着愉悦的光芒，“咱们来瞧瞧你够不够格。”
“A butcher’s boy who wants to be a knight, is it?” Joffrey swung down from his mount, sword in hand. “Pick up your sword, butcher’s boy,” he said, his eyes bright with amusement. “Let us see how good you are.”
米凯吓得伫立原地。
Mycah stood there, frozen with fear.
乔佛里朝他走去。“快啊，快捡，难道你只敢欺负小女生？”
Joffrey walked toward him. “Go on, pick it up. Or do you only fight little girls?”
“大人，是她逼我的，”米凯说，“是她逼我这么做的。”
“She ast me to, m’lord,” Mycah said. “She ast me to.”
珊莎只需瞄艾莉亚一眼，看见妹妹倏地红了脸，便知男孩所言不假。但乔佛里听不进去，刚喝的那些酒让他性子野了起来。“你到底捡还是不捡？”
Sansa had only to glance at Arya and see the flush on her sister’s face to know the boy was telling the truth, but Joffrey was in no mood to listen. The wine had made him wild. “Are you going to pick up your sword?”
米凯摇头：“大人，这不过是根木棒，不是剑，只是根棍子罢了。”
Mycah shook his head. “It’s only a stick, m’lord. It’s not no sword, it’s only a stick.”
“你也不过是个杀猪小弟，根本不是骑士。”乔佛里举起‘狮牙’，剑尖指着米凯眼睛下方的脸颊，屠夫学徒站在原地颤抖。“刚才你打的是我这位小姐的妹妹，你知不知道？”一朵殷红的血花在剑刺入的地方绽放，男孩的脸上缓缓流下一道红线。
“And you’re only a butcher’s boy, and no knight.” Joffrey lifted Lion’s Tooth and laid its point on Mycah’s cheek below the eye, as the butcher’s boy stood trembling. “That was my lady’s sister you were hitting, do you know that?” A bright bud of blood blossomed where his sword pressed into Mycah’s flesh, and a slow red line trickled down the boy’s cheek.
“住手！”艾莉亚尖叫，随即一把抓起刚才掉落的木棍。
“Stop it!” Arya screamed. She grabbed up her fallen stick.
珊莎好害怕。“艾莉亚，你别插手。”
Sansa was afraid. “Arya, you stay out of this.”
“我不会把他……伤得太厉害。”乔佛里王子告诉艾莉亚，他的视线自始至终没离开屠夫的小徒弟。
“I won’t hurt him … much,” Prince Joffrey told Arya, never taking his eyes off the butcher’s boy.
艾莉亚朝他扑去。
Arya went for him.
珊莎见状急忙跳下马，但已经太迟了。艾莉亚双手握住木棒，朝王子后脑狠狠一敲，只听喀啦一声，棍子应声开裂。乔佛里则踉跄旋身，大声骂着粗话。米凯拔腿便往林子里逃。艾莉亚挥棒再打，但这回乔佛里举起‘狮牙’，把她手中的扫帚棍打断、震飞。他后脑勺全是血，眼里燃烧着怒火，珊莎拚命尖叫：“住手，你们两个都住手，你们把事情都搞砸了。”但没人听她的话。艾莉亚捡起石块朝乔佛里的头掷去，却打中了他的马。血红色的骏马扬起前腿，跟在米凯后面狂奔。“住手！不要打了！”珊莎尖叫。乔佛里挥剑朝艾莉亚猛砍，嘴里不停喝骂着可怕的脏话。这时艾莉亚也害怕得急步后退，但乔佛里节节进逼，把她逼到没有退路的林边。珊莎不知如何是好，只能无助地在旁观望，视线几乎被泪水所掩盖。
Sansa slid off her mare, but she was too slow. Arya swung with both hands. There was a loud crack as the wood split against the back of the prince’s head, and then everything happened at once before Sansa’s horrified eyes. Joffrey staggered and whirled around, roaring curses. Mycah ran for the trees as fast as his legs would take him. Arya swung at the prince again, but this time Joffrey caught the blow on Lion’s Tooth and sent her broken stick flying from her hands. The back of his head was all bloody and his eyes were on fire. Sansa was shrieking, “No, no, stop it, stop it, both of you, you’re spoiling it,” but no one was listening. Arya scooped up a rock and hurled it at Joffrey’s head. She hit his horse instead, and the blood bay reared and went galloping off after Mycah. “Stop it, don’t, stop it!” Sansa screamed. Joffrey slashed at Arya with his sword, screaming obscenities, terrible words, filthy words. Arya darted back, frightened now, but Joffrey followed, hounding her toward the woods, backing her up against a tree. Sansa didn’t know what to do. She watched helplessly, almost blind from her tears.
说时迟，那时快，一团灰影从她身边闪过，下一刻娜梅莉亚已跃上乔佛里右手，张口便咬。狼把人扑倒在地，他手一松剑便掉落，人和狼双双在草地上打滚，狼不停咆哮撕扯，王子则惨叫连连。“把它弄走！”他尖叫道，“快把它弄走！”
Then a grey blur flashed past her, and suddenly Nymeria was there, leaping, jaws closing around Joffrey’s sword arm. The steel fell from his fingers as the wolf knocked him off his feet, and they rolled in the grass, the wolf snarling and ripping at him, the prince shrieking in pain. “Get it off,” he screamed. “Get it off!”
艾莉亚的声音如鞭子划空。“娜梅莉亚！”
Arya’s voice cracked like a whip. “Nymeria!”
冰原狼立时放开乔佛里，跑到艾莉亚身边。王子躺在草丛里，抱着受伤的手臂啜泣。他的衣服上全是血。艾莉亚说：“她也没把你……伤得太厉害嘛。”她捡起‘狮牙’，站在他跟前，双手握剑。
The direwolf let go of Joffrey and moved to Arya’s side. The prince lay in the grass, whimpering, cradling his mangled arm. His shirt was soaked in blood. Arya said, “She didn’t hurt you … much.” She picked up Lion’s Tooth where it had fallen, and stood over him, holding the sword with both hands.
乔佛里抬头看到她，发出害怕的呜咽。“不要，”他说，“不要伤害我，不然我要去告诉妈妈。”
Joffrey made a scared whimpery sound as he looked up at her. “No,” he said, “don’t hurt me. I’ll tell my mother.”
“你别欺负他！”珊莎对妹妹尖叫。
“You leave him alone!” Sansa screamed at her sister.
艾莉亚猛地一旋身，用尽全身力气把剑抛了出去。宝剑飞过河面，蓝钢打造的剑身在阳光下闪闪发光，最后噗通一声掉进水里，刹时便沉了下去。乔佛里见状又是一声呻吟。艾莉亚跑向她的坐骑，娜梅莉亚跟在她后面。
Arya whirled and heaved the sword into the air, putting her whole body into the throw. The blue steel flashed in the sun as the sword spun out over the river. It hit the water and vanished with a splash. Joffrey moaned. Arya ran off to her horse, Nymeria loping at her heels.
她们离开后，珊莎走到王子身旁。他痛苦地紧闭双眼，呼吸急促。珊莎在他身旁跪下。“乔佛里，”她抽噎道，“噢，看看她们做了什么好事，把你伤成这样。我可怜的王子，你别害怕，我这就骑马去刚才的庄园，找人来帮忙。”她伸手温柔地拨开他柔软的金发。
After they had gone, Sansa went to Prince Joffrey. His eyes were closed in pain, his breath ragged. Sansa knelt beside him. “Joffrey,” she sobbed. “Oh, look what they did, look what they did. My poor prince. Don’t be afraid. I’ll ride to the holdfast and bring help for you.” Tenderly she reached out and brushed back his soft blond hair.
他猛然睁开双眼，眼里只有恨意和最彻底的轻蔑。“那就滚罢。”他对她啐了口唾沫。“还有，不—准—碰—我。”
His eyes snapped open and looked at her, and there was nothing but loathing there, nothing but the vilest contempt. “Then go,” he spit at her. “And don’t touch me.”
第十七章 艾德
*EDDARD
“老爷，找到她了。”
“T hey’ve found her, my lord.”
奈德立刻起身。“是我们的人，还是兰尼斯特家的人？”
Ned rose quickly. “Our men or Lannister’s?”
“是乔里找到的。”他的管家维扬·普尔回答，“小姐没有受伤。”
“It was Jory,” his steward Vayon Poole replied. “She’s not been harmed.”
“谢天谢地。”奈德道。他的部下已经找了艾莉亚四天，王后的人马也同时出动。“她在哪儿？叫乔里立刻把她带来。”
“Thank the gods,” Ned said. His men had been searching for Arya for four days now, but the queen’s men had been out hunting as well. “Where is she? Tell Jory to bring her here at once.”
“老爷，对不起。”普尔告诉他，“城门的守卫是兰尼斯特家的人，乔里带她进来时他们马上通报了王后，结果她被直接带到国王那里去了……”
“I am sorry, my lord,” Poole told him. “The guards on the gate were Lannister men, and they informed the queen when Jory brought her in. She’s being taken directly before the king …”
“这女人该死！”奈德大步朝门口走去。“去找珊莎，然后把她带到会客厅，到时候可能会需要她出面作证。”他火冒三丈地走下高塔楼梯。前三天他亲自率领搜寻行动，自打艾莉亚失踪，他几乎没阖过眼。到今早上，他心痛外加疲倦，连站都快站不稳了。然而现在他怒火中烧，全身充满力量。
“Damn that woman!” Ned said, striding to the door. “Find Sansa and bring her to the audience chamber. Her voice may be needed.” He descended the tower steps in a red rage. He had led searches himself for the first three days, and had scarcely slept an hour since Arya had disappeared. This morning he had been so heartsick and weary he could scarcely stand, but now his fury was on him, filling him with strength.
穿过城堡庭院时有人出声叫他，但奈德行色匆忙，根本无暇理会。他本想迈步开跑，可再怎么说他总是御前首相，而首相多少得维持一定的尊严。他很清楚众人的眼光都集中在他身上，人们正四下窃窃私语，讨论他会作出什么举动。
Men called out to him as he crossed the castle yard, but Ned ignored them in his haste. He would have run, but he was still the King’s Hand, and a Hand must keep his dignity. He was aware of the eyes that followed him, of the muttered voices wondering what he would do.
这座城堡连同周围的土地都很朴素，位于三叉戟河以南，离河边只有半日骑程。先前王家车队不请自来地进驻城堡，成为城主雷蒙·戴瑞爵士的座上客，同时沿河两岸搜索艾莉亚和那屠夫小弟。他们实在称得上是不速之客。雷蒙爵士虽向国王称臣，但当年戴瑞家可是打着雷加的真龙旗帜在三叉戟河为勤王奋战的望族之一，他三位兄长通通命丧于斯，而这事不论劳勃还是雷蒙爵士都没有忘记。如今国王的队伍、戴瑞家的群众、兰尼斯特家和史塔克家的人马通通涌进狭小的城堡中，紧张的气氛可想而知。
The castle was a modest holding a half day’s ride south of the Trident. The royal party had made themselves the uninvited guests of its lord, Ser Raymun Darry, while the hunt for Arya and the butcher’s boy was conducted on both sides of the river. They were not welcome visitors. Ser Raymun lived under the king’s peace, but his family had fought beneath Rhaegar’s dragon banners at the Trident, and his three older brothers had died there, a truth neither Robert nor Ser Raymun had forgotten. With king’s men, Darry men, Lannister men, and Stark men all crammed into a castle far too small for them, tensions burned hot and heavy.
国王把雷蒙爵士的会客厅临时征来处理公务，奈德果然在此找到他们。他冲进房间时，里面已经挤满了人。太拥挤了，他心想，假如没这么多人，他和劳勃应该可以私下心平气和地解决此事。
The king had appropriated Ser Raymun’s audience chamber, and that was where Ned found them. The room was crowded when he burst in. Too crowded, he thought; left alone, he and Robert might have been able to settle the matter amicably.
劳勃脸色凝重，整个人跨坐在长厅尽头戴瑞的高位上。瑟曦·兰尼斯特和她儿子站在他身旁。王后把一只手搭上乔佛里的肩膀。男孩的手臂仍旧扎满厚重的丝质绷带。
Robert was slumped in Darry’s high seat at the far end of the room, his face closed and sullen. Cersei Lannister and her son stood beside him. The queen had her hand on Joffrey’s shoulder. Thick silken bandages still covered the boy’s arm.
艾莉亚孤零零地站在大厅中央，只有乔里·凯索陪着她，每一只眼睛的视线都集中在她身上。“艾莉亚。”奈德大声唤道。他朝她走去，靴子在石地板上铿锵作响。她一看到他立刻大叫出声，随即抽抽噎噎地哭了起来。
Arya stood in the center of the room, alone but for Jory Cassel, every eye upon her. “Arya,” Ned called loudly. He went to her, his boots ringing on the stone floor. When she saw him, she cried out and began to sob.
奈德单膝跪下，把她搂进怀里，她浑身颤抖个不停。“对不起，”她啜泣道，“对不起，对不起！”
Ned went to one knee and took her in his arms. She was shaking. “I’m sorry,” she sobbed, “I’m sorry, I’m sorry.”
“我知道。”他说。在他怀中的她实在好瘦小，不过是个骨瘦如柴的小女孩。很难想像她竟能闯出这么大的祸。“你有没有受伤？”
“I know,” he said. She felt so tiny in his arms, nothing but a scrawny little girl. It was hard to see how she had caused so much trouble. “Are you hurt?”
“没有。”她一脸污泥，眼泪在脸颊上留下了粉红色的痕迹。“只是有点饿，我吃了点野莓，但没别的东西吃。”
“No.” Her face was dirty, and her tears left pink tracks down her cheeks. “Hungry some. I ate some berries, but there was nothing else.”
“我们马上就给你弄吃的。”奈德向她保证，然后他起身面对国王。“你这是什么意思？”他环视大厅，寻找友善的面孔，然而除了他自己的部属以外，寥寥无几。雷蒙·戴瑞爵士面无表情，蓝礼公爵似笑非笑，谁也弄不清他究竟在想什么，老巴利斯坦则是神色沉重。余众都是兰尼斯特的人，自然个个满怀敌意。惟一算得好运的是詹姆·兰尼斯特和桑铎·克里冈此刻正率领搜索队去了三叉戟河北岸，因此都不在场。“找到我女儿为什么不通知我？”
“We’ll feed you soon enough,” Ned promised. He rose to face the king. “What is the meaning of this?” His eyes swept the room, searching for friendly faces. But for his own men, they were few enough. Ser Raymun Darry guarded his look well. Lord Renly wore a half smile that might mean anything, and old Ser Barristan was grave; the rest were Lannister men, and hostile. Their only good fortune was that both Jaime Lannister and Sandor Clegane were missing, leading searches north of the Trident. “Why was I not told that my daughter had been found?” Ned demanded, his voice ringing. “Why was she not brought to me at once?”
他本是对劳勃说话，但瑟曦·兰尼斯特却抢先开口：“放肆！你竟敢用这种口气对国王说话！”
He spoke to Robert, but it was Cersei Lannister who answered. “How dare you speak to your king in that manner!”
听到这话，国王动了动。“臭女人，你给我闭嘴。”他斥道，接着坐直身子，“奈德，不好意思，我没有吓她的意思，只是想先把她带过来，早点了结这桩事比较好。”
At that, the king stirred. “Quiet, woman,” he snapped. He straightened in his seat. “I am sorry, Ned. I never meant to frighten the girl. It seemed best to bring her here and get the business done with quickly.”
“你指的到底是哪桩事？”奈德的声音冷若冰霜。
“And what business is that?” Ned put ice in his voice.
王后踏步向前。“史塔克，你自己很清楚。你这野丫头和那杀猪的联手攻击我的宝贝儿子，她那只野狼差点就咬断他一条胳膊。”
The queen stepped forward. “You know full well, Stark. This girl of yours attacked my son. Her and her butcher’s boy. That animal of hers tried to tear his arm off.”
“才不是这样，”艾莉亚高声道，“她只咬了他一下，而且是因为他先欺负米凯。”
“That’s not true,” Arya said loudly. “She just bit him a little. He was hurting Mycah.”
“乔佛里已经把事情的经过都告诉我们了，”王后道，“你和那屠夫学徒一边用棍子打他，你一边放狼咬他。”
“Joff told us what happened,” the queen said. “You and the butcher boy beat him with clubs while you set your wolf on him.”
“事情不是这样的。”艾莉亚眼泪又快掉了下来，奈德连忙伸手拍拍她肩膀。
“That’s not how it was,” Arya said, close to tears again. Ned put a hand on her shoulder.
“明明就是这样！”乔佛里王子坚持，“他们一起围攻我，她还把‘狮牙’丢进河里！”奈德发觉他说话时正眼都不瞧艾莉亚一眼。
“Yes it is!” Prince Joffrey insisted. “They all attacked me, and she threw Lion’s Tooth in the river!” Ned noticed that he did not so much as glance at Arya as he spoke.
“你说谎！”艾莉亚大叫。
“Liar!” Arya yelled.
“够了！”国王大吼着从椅子上站起来，声音里充满了恼怒。四周立时安静，他吹胡子瞪眼地对艾莉亚说：“孩子，你现在把事情经过告诉我，原原本本地告诉我，老老实实地讲。要知道欺骗国王可是滔天大罪。”然后他转向儿子，“等她说完自然会轮到你，在那之前，你给我把嘴闭上。”
“Shut up!” the prince yelled back.
当艾莉亚开始陈述事情始末时，奈德听见身后大门开启。他往后一瞄，只见维扬·普尔带着珊莎走了进来。他们静静地站在厅堂后方听艾莉亚说话。当她说到把乔佛里的剑丢进三叉戟河那段时，蓝礼·拜拉席恩忍不住哈哈大笑，国王则怒发冲冠，“巴利斯坦爵士，请护送我弟弟出去，免得他笑岔了气。”
“Enough!” the king roared, rising from his seat, his voice thick with irritation. Silence fell. He glowered at Arya through his thick beard. “Now, child, you will tell me what happened. Tell it all, and tell it true. It is a great crime to lie to a king.” Then he looked over at his son. “When she is done, you will have your turn. Until then, hold your tongue.”
蓝礼公爵止住笑。“哥哥真是太周到了。我自己可以找到路。”他朝乔佛里一鞠躬，“待会儿你或许可以告诉我，一个干巴巴的九岁小女生究竟是怎么用扫把棍打落你的武器，然后丢进河里的。”大门关闭之际，奈德还听见他说：“好个‘狮牙’。”说完又是大笑不已。
As Arya began her story, Ned heard the door open behind him. He glanced back and saw Vayon Poole enter with Sansa. They stood quietly at the back of the hall as Arya spoke. When she got to the part where she threw Joffrey’s sword into the middle of the Trident, Renly Baratheon began to laugh. The king bristled. “Ser Barristan, escort my brother from the hall before he chokes.”
接着轮到乔佛里说他那个大相径庭的版本，他的脸色非常苍白。儿子说完之后，国王沉重地起立，那样子恨不得能及早脱身。“你叫我怎么办？他说的是一回事，而她说的却完全是另一回事。”
Lord Renly stifled his laughter. “My brother is too kind. I can find the door myself.” He bowed to Joffrey. “Perchance later you’ll tell me how a nine-year-old girl the size of a wet rat managed to disarm you with a broom handle and throw your sword in the river.” As the door swung shut behind him, Ned heard him say, “Lion’s Tooth,” and guffaw once more.
“当时在场的不止他们两人。”奈德道，“珊莎，过来。”艾莉亚失踪的那天夜里，奈德听珊莎讲过事情经过，他知道实情为何。“告诉我们究竟是怎么回事。”
Prince Joffrey was pale as he began his very different version of events. When his son was done talking, the king rose heavily from his seat, looking like a man who wanted to be anywhere but here. “What in all the seven hells am I supposed to make of this? He says one thing, she says another.”
他的长女犹豫不决地走向前。她穿着一件蓝色绣白边的天鹅绒洋装，脖子上挂了条银锁链，蓬松的红褐头发梳得发亮。她对妹妹眨了眨眼，接着又看看王子。“我不知道，”她噙着眼泪说，仿佛想拔腿就逃。“我不记得了，事情发生得好快，我没看见……”
“They were not the only ones present,” Ned said. “Sansa, come here.” Ned had heard her version of the story the night Arya had vanished. He knew the truth. “Tell us what happened.”
“你这个烂货！”艾莉亚狂叫。她像一枝利箭般朝她姐姐飞扑过去，把珊莎撞倒在地板上，使劲地拳打脚踢。“骗子，骗子，骗子，骗子。”
His eldest daughter stepped forward hesitantly. She was dressed in blue velvets trimmed with white, a silver chain around her neck. Her thick auburn hair had been brushed until it shone. She blinked at her sister, then at the young prince. “I don’t know,” she said tearfully, looking as though she wanted to bolt. “I don’t remember. Everything happened so fast, I didn’t see …”
“艾莉亚，住手！”奈德喝道。乔里把她从她姐姐身上拉开时，她双脚还兀自踢个不停。奈德扶起珊莎，她脸色苍白，浑身颤抖。“你没受伤吧？”他问。但她只是怔怔地望着艾莉亚，仿佛充耳不闻。
“You rotten!” Arya shrieked. She flew at her sister like an arrow, knocking Sansa down to the ground, pummeling her. “Liar, liar, liar, liar.”
“这丫头跟她那只脏东西一个野德行。”瑟曦·兰尼斯特说，“劳勃，她非受罚不可。”
“Arya, stop it!” Ned shouted. Jory pulled her off her sister, kicking. Sansa was pale and shaking as Ned lifted her back to her feet. “Are you hurt?” he asked, but she was staring at Arya, and she did not seem to hear.
“七层地狱啊，”劳勃咒道，“瑟曦，你看看她，她是个小孩子，你要我怎么办？打她几鞭游街示众吗？该死，不过就是小孩打架，现在没事了，也没什么严重后果。”
“The girl is as wild as that filthy animal of hers,” Cersei Lannister said. “Robert, I want her punished.”
王后气坏了。“小乔手上一辈子都会留着疤痕。”
“Seven hells,” Robert swore. “Cersei, look at her. She’s a child. What would you have me do, whip her through the streets? Damn it, children fight. It’s over. No lasting harm was done.”
劳勃·拜拉席恩看了看他长子。“那就留着吧，或许这会给他一点教训。奈德，好好管教你女儿，我也会好好管教我儿子。”
The queen was furious. “Joff will carry those scars for the rest of his life.”
“国王陛下，我乐意之至。”奈德如释重负。
Robert Baratheon looked at his eldest son. “So he will. Perhaps they will teach him a lesson. Ned, see that your daughter is disciplined. I will do the same with my son.”
劳勃正准备走开，没想到王后还不肯罢休。“那只狼又该怎么办？”她叫住他。“那只蹂躏你儿子的禽兽该如何处置？”
“Gladly, Your Grace,” Ned said with vast relief.
国王停下脚步，转身皱眉道：“我倒是把那头该死的狼给忘了。”
Robert started to walk away, but the queen was not done. “And what of the direwolf?” she called after him. “What of the beast that savaged your son?”
奈德看见艾莉亚在乔里怀中绷紧身子，乔里连忙开口：“陛下，那只狼一点影子都没有。”
The king stopped, turned back, frowned. “I’d forgotten about the damned wolf.”
劳勃看来并无不悦。“找不到？那就算了。”
Ned could see Arya tense in Jory’s arms. Jory spoke up quickly. “We found no trace of the direwolf, Your Grace.”
王后则提高音量：“把狼皮给我剥来的，赏金龙一百枚！”
Robert did not look unhappy. “No? So be it.”
“这毛皮还真贵，”劳勃咕哝，“臭女人，我可没兴趣。你要买就用你他妈兰尼斯特家的钱去买。”
The queen raised her voice. “A hundred golden dragons to the man who brings me its skin!”
王后冷冷地看着他，“想不到你如此吝啬。我以为我嫁的国王会赶快为我找来狼皮铺床。”
“A costly pelt,” Robert grumbled. “I want no part of this, woman. You can damn well buy your furs with Lannister gold.”
劳勃脸色一沉，怒道：“没狼还能铺得满床狼皮，你当我会变魔术？”
The queen regarded him coolly. “I had not thought you so niggardly. The king I’d thought to wed would have laid a wolfskin across my bed before the sun went down.”
“谁说我们没有狼？”瑟曦·兰尼斯特说。她的语气非常沉静，但那双碧眼里却闪着胜利的光芒。
Robert’s face darkened with anger. “That would be a fine trick, without a wolf.”
众人过了好一阵子才明白她的意思，等大家都会意过来，国王很不高兴地耸耸肩：“随你便。叫伊林爵士去办。”
“We have a wolf,” Cersei Lannister said. Her voice was very quiet, but her green eyes shone with triumph.
“劳勃，你不是说真的吧？”奈德抗议。
It took them all a moment to comprehend her words, but when they did, the king shrugged irritably. “As you will. Have Ser Ilyn see to it.”
国王已经没心情再争论下去。“别说了，奈德，这事到此为止。冰原狼本来就野性难改，假如不除掉，你女儿迟早会跟我儿子一样遭殃。帮她弄条狗，她会快乐点。”
“Robert, you cannot mean this,” Ned protested.
这时珊莎终于明白了国王的意思，她望向父亲，眼里满是惊惶。“他不是指淑女，是不是？”她在他脸上看到了答案。“不，”她说，“不要杀淑女。淑女不咬人的，她最乖……”
The king was in no mood for more argument. “Enough, Ned, I will hear no more. A direwolf is a savage beast. Sooner or later it would have turned on your girl the same way the other did on my son. Get her a dog, she’ll be happier for it.”
“淑女当时根本不在场，”艾莉亚生气地叫道，“你不要欺负她！”
That was when Sansa finally seemed to comprehend. Her eyes were frightened as they went to her father. “He doesn’t mean Lady, does he?” She saw the truth on his face. “No,” she said. “No, not Lady, Lady didn’t bite anybody, she’s good …”
“叫他们住手，”珊莎哀求，“叫他们住手，求求你，咬人的不是淑女，是娜梅莉亚，动手的是艾莉亚，别让他们乱来，不是淑女干的，别让他们伤害淑女，我会叫她乖乖听话，我保证，我保证……”她终于忍不住哭了起来。
“Lady wasn’t there,” Arya shouted angrily. “You leave her alone!”
奈德惟一能做的只是紧紧搂住她，让她哭个痛快。他的视线穿过大厅，看着他那比骨肉还亲的老友劳勃。“劳勃，看在我的份上，看在你对我妹妹的爱份上，不要这样。我求求你。”
“Stop them,” Sansa pleaded, “don’t let them do it, please, please, it wasn’t Lady, it was Nymeria, Arya did it, you can’t, it wasn’t Lady, don’t let them hurt Lady, I’ll make her be good, I promise, I promise …” She started to cry.
国王看他良久，然后转头看着妻子。“瑟曦，你真该死。”他愤恨地说。
All Ned could do was take her in his arms and hold her while she wept. He looked across the room at Robert. His old friend, closer than any brother. “Please, Robert. For the love you bear me. For the love you bore my sister. Please.”
奈德轻柔地从珊莎的搂抱里脱身而起，突然间，过去四天累积的所有疲惫又排山倒海般袭上心头。“劳勃，那你自己动手，”他的音调冷若冰霜。“敢作敢当。”
The king looked at them for a long moment, then turned his eyes on his wife. “Damn you, Cersei,” he said with loathing.
劳勃眼神呆滞地看了看奈德，然后迈开沉重的步伐，一言不发地转身离去。厅堂里顿时一片死寂。
Ned stood, gently disengaging himself from Sansa’s grasp. All the weariness of the past four days had returned to him. “Do it yourself then, Robert,” he said in a voice cold and sharp as steel. “At least have the courage to do it yourself.”
“那只冰原狼在哪里？”她丈夫刚离开，瑟曦·兰尼斯特便迫不及待地问。乔佛里王子站在她身边微笑。
Robert looked at Ned with flat, dead eyes and left without a word, his footsteps heavy as lead. Silence filled the hall.
“王后陛下，那头狼被拴在城门外。”巴利斯坦·赛尔弥爵士很不情愿地回答。
“Where is the direwolf?” Cersei Lannister asked when her husband was gone. Beside her, Prince Joffrey was smiling.
“伊林·派恩爵……”
“The beast is chained up outside the gatehouse, Your Grace,” Ser Barristan Selmy answered reluctantly.
“不，”奈德道，“乔里，带女孩们回房去，然后把‘寒冰’拿来。”这番话一字一句都苦如胆汁，但他不得不说。“假如她非死不可，我要亲自动手。”
“Send for Ilyn Payne.”
瑟曦·兰尼斯特满脸狐疑地看着他。“史塔克大人，你要亲自动手？想耍什么把戏？你为什么要亲自动手？”
“No,” Ned said. “Jory, take the girls back to their rooms and bring me Ice.” The words tasted of bile in his throat, but he forced them out. “If it must be done, I will do it.”
众人的目光都集中在他身上，其中珊莎的眼神最伤人。“她来自北方，死也要死得像个北方人，决不死在屠夫手里。”
Cersei Lannister regarded him suspiciously. “You, Stark? Is this some trick? Why would you do such a thing?”
他带着眼底熊熊的怒火和耳际女儿悲泣的回音离开大厅，在拴狼的地方找到那头小冰原狼。奈德在她身边坐了一会儿。“淑女，”他试探着叫她的名字。从前他没怎么留心孩子们给小狼起的名字，如今这么一细看，立时便明白珊莎取得真是恰如其分。她是整窝狼里最娇小，最漂亮，也最柔顺服帖的一只。她睁大明亮的金黄色眸子望他，他忍不住摸摸她厚实的灰毛。
They were all staring at him, but it was Sansa’s look that cut. “She is of the north. She deserves better than a butcher.”
没过多久，乔里便送来了“寒冰”。
He left the room with his eyes burning and his daughter’s wails echoing in his ears, and found the direwolf pup where they chained her. Ned sat beside her for a while. “Lady,” he said, tasting the name. He had never paid much attention to the names the children had picked, but looking at her now, he knew that Sansa had chosen well. She was the smallest of the litter, the prettiest, the most gentle and trusting. She looked at him with bright golden eyes, and he ruffled her thick grey fur.
完事之后，他说：“挑四个人，派他们将遗体护送回北方，将她葬在临冬城。”
Shortly, Jory brought him Ice.
“从这里一路送回北方？”乔里有些吃惊。
When it was over, he said, “Choose four men and have them take the body north. Bury her at Winterfell.”
“一路送回北方。”奈德重复。“那兰尼斯特女人休想得到这张狼皮。”
“All that way?” Jory said, astonished.
他拖着疲惫不堪的身躯朝城楼走去，打算狠狠睡上一觉，结果迎面撞见桑铎·克里冈和他的手下结束搜索任务，骑马吆喝着冲进城堡。他的战马背上悬着一个沉甸甸，用血淋淋的斗篷包裹的东西。“首相大人，没看到您女儿。”“猎狗”在马上嘶声说，“但我们找到了她的小宠物，总算也没白费工夫。”他伸手把那袋东西一扫，布袋重重地落在奈德面前。
“All that way,” Ned affirmed. “The Lannister woman shall never have this skin.”
奈德弯身拉开斗篷，心里不知待会如何向艾莉亚交代。但布里包着的却并非娜梅莉亚，而是屠夫小弟米凯。他浑身都是干涸的血渍，伤口从肩膀直到腰际，整个人几乎被一记自上而下的重击生生劈成两截。
He was walking back to the tower to give himself up to sleep at last when Sandor Clegane and his riders came pounding through the castle gate, back from their hunt.
“你骑马追杀他。”奈德说。
There was something slung over the back of his destrier, a heavy shape wrapped in a bloody cloak. “No sign of your daughter, Hand,” the Hound rasped down, “but the day was not wholly wasted. We got her little pet.” He reached back and shoved the burden off, and it fell with a thump in front of Ned.
猎狗的眼睛似乎从他那顶狰狞的狗头盔底射出光芒。“还不是因为他爱跑，”他看着奈德的脸，笑了，“只可惜跑得不够快。”
Bending, Ned pulled back the cloak, dreading the words he would have to find for Arya, but it was not Nymeria after all. It was the butcher’s boy, Mycah, his body covered in dried blood. He had been cut almost in half from shoulder to waist by some terrible blow struck from above.
第十八章 布兰
“You rode him down,” Ned said.
他不断下坠，仿佛经过了好多好多年。
The Hound’s eyes seemed to glitter through the steel of that hideous dog’s-head helm. “He ran.” He looked at Ned’s face and laughed. “But not very fast.”
快飞吧，一个声音在黑暗中低语，然而布兰不知该怎么飞，所以只好继续不断坠落。
*BRAN
鲁温师傅曾经捏制了一个陶土娃娃，烧烤得又硬又脆，为它穿上布兰的衣服，然后从城楼上扔下去。布兰一直记得陶土娃娃摔得粉身碎骨的模样。“但我绝对不会摔下去。”他说，然后继续往下坠。
I t seemed as though he had been falling for years.
虽然四周都是灰蒙蒙的雾气，看不清地面究竟有多远，但他可以感觉到自己掉落的速度有多快，也知道下面等着自己的是什么。即便在梦中，你也不可能永无止尽地这么一直掉下去。他知道，他会在落地前的一刹那醒来，人总是在落地前的一刹那醒来的。
Fly , a voice whispered in the darkness, but Bran did not know how to fly, so all he could do was fall.
那要是你醒不来呢？那个声音问。
Maester Luwin made a little boy of clay, baked him till he was hard and brittle, dressed him in Bran’s clothes, and flung him off a roof. Bran remembered the way he shattered. “But I never fall,” he said, falling.
地面变得更近，虽然依旧遥遥无期，相距千里，但总是近了些。置身半空又暗又冷，没有太阳，没有星辰，只有迎面扑来的大地和灰雾，还有这陌生的细语。他好想哭。
The ground was so far below him he could barely make it out through the grey mists that whirled around him, but he could feel how fast he was falling, and he knew what was waiting for him down there. Even in dreams, you could not fall forever. He would wake up in the instant before he hit the ground, he knew. You always woke up in the instant before you hit the ground.
不要哭，飞。
And if you don’t? the voice asked.
“我不会飞，”布兰说，“不会，不会啊……”
The ground was closer now, still far far away, a thousand miles away, but closer than it had been. It was cold here in the darkness. There was no sun, no stars, only the ground below coming up to smash him, and the grey mists, and the whispering voice. He wanted to cry.
你怎么知道？你试过吗？
Not cry. Fly .
那声音高亢而尖细，布兰环顾四周想找出声音的来源。他见到一只乌鸦正随着他盘旋直落，但保持在他够不到的距离外。“救救我。”他说。
“I can’t fly,” Bran said. “I can’t, I can’t …”
我正在想办法，乌鸦回答，嘿，你可有玉米？
How do you know? Have you ever tried?
黑暗在他周围晕眩地旋转，布兰忙把手伸进口袋，抽出来时，金黄的谷粒由他指间滑下，与他一同坠落。
The voice was high and thin. Bran looked around to see where it was coming from. A crow was spiraling down with him, just out of reach, following him as he fell. “Help me,” he said.
乌鸦停在他手上，开始啄食。
I’m trying , the crow replied. Say, got any corn?
“你真的是乌鸦？”布兰问。
Bran reached into his pocket as the darkness spun dizzily around him. When he pulled his hand out, golden kernels slid from between his fingers into the air. They fell with him.
你真的在往下坠？乌鸦反问。
The crow landed on his hand and began to eat.
“这只是一场梦。”布兰说。
“Are you really a crow?” Bran asked.
是吗？乌鸦又问。
Are you really falling? the crow asked back.
“我摔到地面的时候自然会醒的。”布兰告诉鸟儿。
“It’s just a dream,” Bran said.
等摔到地面你就死了，乌鸦说完，径自去吃玉米。
Is it? asked the crow.
布兰低下头，现在他可以看见白雪皑皑的连绵峰峦，银色河流在深绿树林中留下的蜿蜒丝线。他闭上双眼，哭了起来。
“I’ll wake up when I hit the ground,” Bran told the bird.
哭哭啼啼没用的，乌鸦说，我说了，惟一的办法就是飞，不是掉眼泪。这有什么难？我不就在飞？乌鸦腾空飞起，拍着翅膀，绕在布兰手边。
You’ll die when you hit the ground , the crow said. It went back to eating corn.
“可你有翅膀。”布兰指出。
Bran looked down. He could see mountains now, their peaks white with snow, and the silver thread of rivers in dark woods. He closed his eyes and began to cry.
说不定你也有。
That won’t do any good , the crow said. I told you, the answer is flying, not crying. How hard can it be. I’m doing it . The crow took to the air and flapped around Bran’s hand.
布兰沿着肩膀摸索，想找自己的羽毛。
“You have wings,” Bran pointed out.
翅膀不只一种，乌鸦说。
Maybe you do too .
布兰看到自己的手脚，好瘦啊，瘦得跟皮包骨一样。难道他一直都这么瘦？他试着去回忆。一张脸从灰雾中浮现，闪耀着金色的光芒。“好好想一想，我为爱情做了些什么，”它说。
Bran felt along his shoulders, groping for feathers.
布兰尖叫起来。
There are different kinds of wings , the crow said.
乌鸦腾空飞起，嘎嘎大叫。不是那个，它对他嘶声叫道，忘记那个，你现在需要的不是它，忘记那件事，抛开那个念头。它停在布兰肩头，啄他，那张亮澄澄的金黄脸孔便随即消失。
Bran was staring at his arms, his legs. He was so skinny, just skin stretched taut over bones. Had he always been so thin? He tried to remember. A face swam up at him out of the grey mist, shining with light, golden. “The things I do for love,” it said.
这时，布兰越掉越快，朝地面急速扑去，灰雾在他耳际怒吼。“你对我做了什么？”他噙着眼泪问乌鸦。
Bran screamed.
我在教你飞。
The crow took to the air, cawing. Not that , it shrieked at him. Forget that, you do not need it now, put it aside, put it away . It landed on Bran’s shoulder, and pecked at him, and the shining golden face was gone.
“我不会飞！”
Bran was falling faster than ever. The grey mists howled around him as he plunged toward the earth below. “What are you doing to me?” he asked the crow, tearful.
你现在不就在飞。
Teaching you how to fly .
“我在往下掉！”
“I can’t fly!”
飞，都是从坠落开始的，乌鸦说，往下看。
You’re flying right now .
“我怕……”
“I’m falling!”
往下看！
Every flight begins with a fall , the crow said. Look down .
布兰往下看，觉得五脏六腑简直都要融化。地面正朝他迎面袭来，整个世界摊在下方，如同一幅五颜六色的织锦。每一件事物都清晰无比，他甚至暂时忘却了恐惧。王国全境和行走其间的形色人事尽收眼底。
“I’m afraid …”
他以翱空翔鹰之姿俯瞰临冬城，高处观之，原本高耸的塔楼竟显得矮胖，城墙则成了泥地上的线条。他看到阳台上的鲁温师傅，一边用只擦得晶亮的青铜管子观测天象，一边皱着眉头在记事本上涂涂写写。他看见哥哥罗柏在广场上练习剑术，手中拿着精钢打造的真正武器，个头比记忆中更要高壮。他看见在马房里工作的那个头脑简单的巨人阿多，轻而易举地把铁砧扛在肩上，仿佛常人举起稻束，送往铁匠密肯的锻炉。在神木林的深处，高大苍白的鱼梁木正对着黑水潭里的倒影沉思，树叶在冷风中作响。当它发觉布兰看着自己，它也自止水里抬起视线，定定地回望他。
LOOK DOWN!
向东望，他看到一艘帆船乘风破浪，穿越咬人湾。他看见母亲独坐船舱，盯着面前桌上一把沾满血渍的尖刀。水手使劲划桨，罗德利克爵士靠着桅栏颤抖喘息。一阵暴风正在他们前方形成，一团怒吼的翻滚乌云，充满无边的雷霆电闪，但不知怎么的，他们却看不到。
Bran looked down, and felt his insides turn to water. The ground was rushing up at him now. The whole world was spread out below him, a tapestry of white and brown and green. He could see everything so clearly that for a moment he forgot to be afraid. He could see the whole realm, and everyone in it.
他又向南望，只见三叉戟河的蓝绿河水奔涌浩荡，他看到父亲脸上刻满哀伤，正向国王苦苦哀求；看到大姐珊莎夜里哭着入眠；看到二姐艾莉亚静静地观望，把秘密藏在心中。他们全被黑影所笼罩，其中一个暗影黑如灰烬，还有张猎犬般恐怖的脸，另一个则全身耀眼金甲，美丽宛如阳光。他们之后站着一个身穿石甲的巨人，更为高壮，当他揭开面罩，里面空空如也，惟有无尽的幽暗和浓浓的黑血。
He saw Winterfell as the eagles see it, the tall towers looking squat and stubby from above, the castle walls just lines in the dirt. He saw Maester Luwin on his balcony, studying the sky through a polished bronze tube and frowning as he made notes in a book. He saw his brother Robb, taller and stronger than he remembered him, practicing swordplay in the yard with real steel in his hand. He saw Hodor, the simple giant from the stables, carrying an anvil to Mikken’s forge, hefting it onto his shoulder as easily as another man might heft a bale of hay. At the heart of the godswood, the great white weirwood brooded over its reflection in the black pool, its leaves rustling in a chill wind. When it felt Bran watching, it lifted its eyes from the still waters and stared back at him knowingly.
抬起眼，他的视线越过狭海，清晰地望向自由贸易城邦及彼方宛如绿色汪洋的多斯拉克草原，望向峰峦脚下的维斯·多斯拉克，望向玉海的传奇之地，望向亚夏之外的阴影之地，魔龙正在那里初曙的旭日下蠢蠢欲动。
He looked east, and saw a galley racing across the waters of the Bite. He saw his mother sitting alone in a cabin, looking at a bloodstained knife on a table in front of her, as the rowers pulled at their oars and Ser Rodrik leaned across a rail, shaking and heaving. A storm was gathering ahead of them, a vast dark roaring lashed by lightning, but somehow they could not see it.
最后他向北望去，看到闪亮如蓝色水晶的绝境长城，看到私生子哥哥琼恩孤独地睡在冰冷的床上，温暖和热度的记忆渐渐消逝，皮肤也随之苍白坚实。他眺望长城之外，视线穿过无边无际、白雪覆盖的森林，越过结冻的河岸，广阔的蓝白冰河，以及不见任何活物踪迹的死寂冰原。他不断朝北望，望向世界尽头的光幕，然后穿过那层光幕，朝寒冬之心看去，这时，他不禁害怕得叫出声来，滚烫的泪水在两颊灼灼发热。
He looked south, and saw the great blue-green rush of the Trident. He saw his father pleading with the king, his face etched with grief. He saw Sansa crying herself to sleep at night, and he saw Arya watching in silence and holding her secrets hard in her heart. There were shadows all around them. One shadow was dark as ash, with the terrible face of a hound. Another was armored like the sun, golden and beautiful. Over them both loomed a giant in armor made of stone, but when he opened his visor, there was nothing inside but darkness and thick black blood.
现在你知道了吧？乌鸦端坐在他肩膀上悄声道，现在你知道为什么要活下去了吧？
He lifted his eyes and saw clear across the narrow sea, to the Free Cities and the green Dothraki sea and beyond, to Vaes Dothrak under its mountain, to the fabled lands of the Jade Sea, to Asshai by the Shadow, where dragons stirred beneath the sunrise.
“为什么？”布兰不解地问，仍旧不停地往下掉，往下掉。
Finally he looked north. He saw the Wall shining like blue crystal, and his bastard brother Jon sleeping alone in a cold bed, his skin growing pale and hard as the memory of all warmth fled from him. And he looked past the Wall, past endless forests cloaked in snow, past the frozen shore and the great blue-white rivers of ice and the dead plains where nothing grew or lived. North and north and north he looked, to the curtain of light at the end of the world, and then beyond that curtain. He looked deep into the heart of winter, and then he cried out, afraid, and the heat of his tears burned on his cheeks.
因为凛冬将至。
Now you know , the crow whispered as it sat on his shoulder. Now you know why you must live .
布兰看看肩膀上的乌鸦，乌鸦也看着他。它原来有三只眼睛，第三只眼里充满一种恐怖的知识。布兰再度下望，如今下方空无一物，惟有冰雪、寒冷和死亡，在一片冰冻的荒原上，插满了锯齿状的蓝白冰针，正等着拥抱他。它们如飞矛般朝他射来，他看到上面挂满成千个做梦人的枯骨，一阵绝望的恐惧笼罩了他。
“Why?” Bran said, not understanding, falling, falling.
“人在恐惧的时候还能勇敢吗？”他听见自己细小邈远的声音这么说。
Because winter is coming .
随后父亲的声音回答道：“人惟有恐惧的时候方能勇敢。”
Bran looked at the crow on his shoulder, and the crow looked back. It had three eyes, and the third eye was full of a terrible knowledge. Bran looked down. There was nothing below him now but snow and cold and death, a frozen wasteland where jagged blue-white spires of ice waited to embrace him. They flew up at him like spears. He saw the bones of a thousand other dreamers impaled upon their points. He was desperately afraid.
就是现在，布兰，乌鸦催促，你得做出抉择，若是不飞，就只有摔死一途。
“Can a man still be brave if he’s afraid?” he heard his own voice saying, small and far away.
死亡厉声尖叫着朝他伸出魔爪。
And his father’s voice replied to him. “That is the only time a man can be brave.”
布兰伸展手臂，飞了。
Now, Bran , the crow urged. Choose. Fly or die .
看不见的翅膀饱饮长风，充满空气，将他带往高处。下方可怕的冰针逐渐消退，天顶苍穹豁然开朗。布兰展翅翱翔，这感觉比爬墙还棒，比任何事都棒。他下面的世界越来越小。
Death reached for him, screaming.
“我会飞了！”他开心地叫道。
Bran spread his arms and flew.
我知道，三眼乌鸦说。它振翅而飞，翅膀拍打着他的脸颊，减缓他的速度，遮蔽他的视线。他不由得在空中摇摆不定。乌鸦的尖喙狠狠啄进他额头中央，两眼之间的地方，布兰突然觉得一阵尖锐的疼痛。
Wings unseen drank the wind and filled and pulled him upward. The terrible needles of ice receded below him. The sky opened up above. Bran soared. It was better than climbing. It was better than anything. The world grew small beneath him.
“你干什么？”他尖叫道。
“I’m flying!” he cried out in delight.
乌鸦张嘴对他嘎嘎叫，那是充满恐惧的刺耳呐喊，随后原本笼罩他的灰雾突然开始颤抖旋转，如同布幔被一把掀开，他这才发现那只乌鸦赫然是个满头黑发的女侍。他好像在什么地方见过她，在临冬城里见过她，对，是这样没错，这下他记起她了。接着他明白自己正是身在临冬城，在某个寒冷高塔房间里的床上，而那个黑发女人失手把一盆水掉在地上。她顾不上摔破的盆子，径自奔下楼梯，一边高喊：“他醒了！他醒了！他醒过来啦！”
I’ve noticed , said the three-eyed crow. It took to the air, flapping its wings in his face, slowing him, blinding him. He faltered in the air as its pinions beat against his cheeks. Its beak stabbed at him fiercely, and Bran felt a sudden blinding pain in the middle of his forehead, between his eyes.
布兰摸摸双眼之间，刚才乌鸦啄的地方还热辣辣的，但额头上却没有任何痕迹，既没有流血也没有伤口。他觉得虚弱又晕眩，试着想下床，却动弹不得。
“What are you doing?” he shrieked.
就在这时，床边有了动静，有个东西轻轻跳上他的双脚，用一双黄澄澄、像是闪亮太阳般的眸子看进他的眼睛。窗子敞开，屋里很冷，但狼传来的暖意却像热水澡一般包围住他。布兰方才明白这是他的小狼……真的吗？他长得好大了。他伸出落叶般颤抖的手摸摸他。
The crow opened its beak and cawed at him, a shrill scream of fear, and the grey mists shuddered and swirled around him and ripped away like a veil, and he saw that the crow was really a woman, a serving woman with long black hair, and he knew her from somewhere, from Winterfell, yes, that was it, he remembered her now, and then he realized that he was in Winterfell, in a bed high in some chilly tower room, and the black-haired woman dropped a basin of water to shatter on the floor and ran down the steps, shouting, “He’s awake, he’s awake, he’s awake.”
等到哥哥罗柏三步并作两步跑上高塔，上气不接下气地冲进房间时，冰原狼正舔着布兰的脸。布兰抬起头，一脸安详地说：“我要叫它‘夏天’。”
Bran touched his forehead, between his eyes. The place where the crow had pecked him was still burning, but there was nothing there, no blood, no wound. He felt weak and dizzy. He tried to get out of bed, but nothing happened.
第十九章 凯特琳
And then there was movement beside the bed, and something landed lightly on his legs. He felt nothing. A pair of yellow eyes looked into his own, shining like the sun. The window was open and it was cold in the room, but the warmth that came off the wolf enfolded him like a hot bath. His pup, Bran realized … or was it? He was so big now. He reached out to pet him, his hand trembling like a leaf.
“一个小时之内，咱们便到君临啦！”
When his brother Robb burst into the room, breathless from his dash up the tower steps, the direwolf was licking Bran’s face. Bran looked up calmly. “His name is Summer,” he said.
凯特琳从桅栏处转过头，强作欢颜道：“船长先生，您的水手表现得非常称职，我要给他们每人一枚银鹿，以表达我的感激。”
*CATELYN
莫里欧·图密提斯船长半鞠躬答谢道：“史塔克夫人，您实在是太慷慨了。有幸为您这样的官家夫人服务，就是最好的报酬。”
“W e will make King’s Landing within the hour.”
“我总是要给他们的。”
Catelyn turned away from the rail and forced herself to smile. “Your oarmen have done well by us, Captain. Each one of them shall have a silver stag, as a token of my gratitude.”
莫里欧微笑：“那就恭敬不如从命。”他的通用语讲得十分流利，只带极轻微的泰洛西口音。他在狭海上讨生活已足足有三十年，据他所说，他最初只是个划桨的水手，继而当上大副，最后才终于有了自己的商船队。双桅帆船“暴风舞者号”是他的第四艘船，共有六十条桨、两根桅杆，也是他最快的一艘。
Captain Moreo Tumitis favored her with a half bow. “You are far too generous, Lady Stark. The honor of carrying a great lady like yourself is all the reward they need.”
至少当凯特琳和罗德利克·凯索爵士马不停蹄地顺流奔波，抵达白港的时候，她是港湾里最快的一艘。泰洛西人的贪婪恶名远播，罗德利克爵士原本主张雇艘无桨单桅渔船出三姐妹群岛，然而凯特琳坚持要这艘大帆船。这是个明智的选择。一路上，风向都与他们作对，倘若没有这些划桨好手，恐怕他们现在还在五指半岛挣扎，遑论驶向旅程的终点君临了。
“But they’ll take the silver anyway.”
就快到了啊，她心想。包扎在棉布绷带中的手指上，被匕首割伤的地方仍在隐隐作痛，凯特琳觉得，痛楚是在提醒她别忘记发生过的事。她左手的小指和无名指没法弯曲，而其他三根手指也永远不可能恢复灵活动作。然而，若能换得布兰性命，这算得了什么？
Moreo smiled. “As you say.” He spoke the Common Tongue fluently, with only the slightest hint of a Tyroshi accent. He’d been plying the narrow sea for thirty years, he’d told her, as oarman, quartermaster, and finally captain of his own trading galleys. The Storm Dancer was his fourth ship, and his fastest, a two-masted galley of sixty oars.
这时罗德利克爵士走上甲板。“我的好朋友啊，”一脸分岔绿胡子的莫里欧说。泰洛西人热爱各种鲜明色彩，连他们的胡须睫毛都不放过。“看到你气色好多了，真替你高兴。”
She had certainly been the fastest of the ships available in White Harbor when Catelyn and Ser Rodrik Cassel had arrived after their headlong gallop downriver. The Tyroshi were notorious for their avarice, and Ser Rodrik had argued for hiring a fishing sloop out of the Three Sisters, but Catelyn had insisted on the galley. It was good that she had. The winds had been against them much of the voyage, and without the galley’s oars they’d still be beating their way past the Fingers, instead of skimming toward King’s Landing and journey’s end.
“哦，”罗德利克附和。“这两天我的确舒服了点，不会那么想寻短见了。”说完他向凯特琳鞠躬。“夫人您好。”
So close , she thought. Beneath the linen bandages, her fingers still throbbed where the dagger had bitten. The pain was her scourge, Catelyn felt, lest she forget. She could not bend the last two fingers on her left hand, and the others would never again be dexterous. Yet that was a small enough price to pay for Bran’s life.
他的气色真的好多了，虽然比起他们自白港启程时，整个人瘦了一小圈，但差不多恢复了原有的神采。他适应不了咬人湾的劲风和狭海的猛浪，行经龙石岛时暴风骤临，他还差点落海，总算是死命抓住一根缆绳，三名莫里欧手下的水手才把他安然救回船舱。
Ser Rodrik chose that moment to appear on deck. “My good friend,” said Moreo through his forked green beard. The Tyroshi loved bright colors, even in their facial hair. “It is so fine to see you looking better.”
“船长刚才说，我们的旅程快结束了。”她说。
“Yes,” Ser Rodrik agreed. “I haven’t wanted to die for almost two days now.” He bowed to Catelyn. “My lady.”
罗德利克爵士勉强挤出一丝笑容。“这么快？”少了雪白的鬓角和胡须，他看起来有些不对劲，仿佛突然间老了十岁，个头变小，往日的威猛也不复见。这是没办法的事，途经啮咬湾时，他趴在桅栏边朝狂风中吐个不休，到得第三次，胡子已经脏得无可救药，只好乖乖让水手用剃刀把胡子理干净。
He was looking better. A shade thinner than he had been when they set out from White Harbor, but almost himself again. The strong winds in the Bite and the roughness of the narrow sea had not agreed with him, and he’d almost gone over the side when the storm seized them unexpectedly off Dragonstone, yet somehow he had clung to a rope until three of Moreo’s men could rescue him and carry him safely below decks.
“你们谈正事，我不打扰了。”莫里欧说完鞠躬离去。
“The captain was just telling me that our voyage is almost at an end,” she said.
帆船像蜻蜓般在水面漂浮，桨叶整齐划一地起起落落。罗德利克爵士拉住栏杆，朝飞驰的陆地远眺。“我实在不是个称职的护卫。”
Ser Rodrik managed a wry smile. “So soon?” He looked odd without his great white side whiskers; smaller somehow, less fierce, and ten years older. Yet back on the Bite it had seemed prudent to submit to a crewman’s razor, after his whiskers had become hopelessly befouled for the third time while he leaned over the rail and retched into the swirling winds.
凯特琳拍拍他的臂膀，“罗德利克爵士，我们安然抵达了目的地，这样就够了。”她的另一只手在斗篷底下摸索，指头僵硬而笨拙。匕首依然在腰际，她发现自己必须不时碰触它才能安心。“接下来我们便去找国王的教头，诸神保佑，希望他值得信赖。”
“I will leave you to discuss your business,” Captain Moreo said. He bowed and took his leave of them.
“艾伦·桑塔加爵士人虽然虚荣了点，却非常正直。”罗德利克爵士伸手欲捻胡须，却扑了个空。他有些不知所措地说：“他很可能认得出那把刀……。可是夫人，上岸之后，我们便有暴露身份的危险，更何况宫中有人一眼就可认出您。”
The galley skimmed the water like a dragonfly, her oars rising and falling in perfect time. Ser Rodrik held the rail and looked out over the passing shore. “I have not been the most valiant of protectors.”
凯特琳抿紧嘴唇。“小指头，”她喃喃道。他的脸浮现在她眼前，一张男孩子的脸，然而他早已不是个孩子了。他的父亲几年前刚过世，如今他是贝里席伯爵，但大家仍唤他作小指头。这绰号是她弟弟艾德慕很久以前在奔流城帮他取的，起因是他家族封地狭小，且位于五指半岛中最小的半岛上，而培提尔在同龄孩子间又特别瘦小的缘故。
Catelyn touched his arm. “We are here, Ser Rodrik, and safely. That is all that truly matters.” Her hand groped beneath her cloak, her fingers stiff and fumbling. The dagger was still at her side. She found she had to touch it now and then, to reassure herself. “Now we must reach the king’s master-at-arms, and pray that he can be trusted.”
罗德利克爵士清清喉咙。“贝里席大人以前是，呃……”他结结巴巴，试图找出比较礼貌的用词。
“Ser Aron Santagar is a vain man, but an honest one.” Ser Rodrik’s hand went to his face to stroke his whiskers and discovered once again that they were gone. He looked nonplussed. “He may know the blade, yes … but, my lady, the moment we go ashore we are at risk. And there are those at court who will know you on sight.”
凯特琳顾不得什么称谓。“他是我父亲的养子，我们在奔流城一起长大。我视他为兄弟，但他却……不只把我当成姐妹。当我和布兰登·史塔克将要成亲的消息宣布时，他要求决斗，胜者才能娶我为妻。那根本就是疯狂之举，布兰登当时已经二十岁，培提尔才不过十五。我求布兰登放他一马，结果他只在他身上留了个疤。事后我父亲把他送走，我至今没和他再见面。”她抬脸面向浪花，仿佛轻快的海风可以吹走回忆。“布兰登死后，他寄信到奔流城给我，但我没拆就通通烧掉。因为那时候，我已经知道奈德会代替他哥哥娶我为妻。”
Catelyn’s mouth grew tight. “Littlefinger,” she murmured. His face swam up before her; a boy’s face, though he was a boy no longer. His father had died several years before, so he was Lord Baelish now, yet still they called him Littlefinger. Her brother Edmure had given him that name, long ago at Riverrun. His family’s modest holdings were on the smallest of the Fingers, and Petyr had been slight and short for his age.
罗德利克爵士伸手想摸胡子，又扑了个空。“小指头如今是御前会议的成员。”
Ser Rodrik cleared his throat. “Lord Baelish once, ah …” His thought trailed off uncertainly in search of the polite word.
“我早知道他会大有发展。”凯特琳说，“他打小就很机灵。可机灵和睿智是两回事，真不知道这些年他有多大改变。”
Catelyn was past delicacy. “He was my father’s ward. We grew up together in Riverrun. I thought of him as a brother, but his feelings for me were … more than brotherly. When it was announced that I was to wed Brandon Stark, Petyr challenged for the right to my hand. It was madness. Brandon was twenty, Petyr scarcely fifteen. I had to beg Brandon to spare Petyr’s life. He let him off with a scar. Afterward my father sent him away. I have not seen him since.” She lifted her face to the spray, as if the brisk wind could blow the memories away. “He wrote to me at Riverrun after Brandon was killed, but I burned the letter unread. By then I knew that Ned would marry me in his brother’s place.”
头顶的瞭望员从绳索上高声呼喝，莫里欧船长在甲板上来回走动下达命令，随着位于三座丘陵之上的都城君临映入眼帘，整个“暴风舞者号”立刻陷入一片忙乱的活动中。
Ser Rodrik’s fingers fumbled once again for nonexistent whiskers. “Littlefinger sits on the small council now.”
凯特琳知道三百年前这片高地完全被森林覆盖，只有零星的渔夫在水流湍急、深涌入海的黑水河北岸定居。后来征服者伊耿自龙石岛渡海而来，他的军队便是在此处登陆，随后他在最高的丘陵顶端用木材和泥土筑起了他第一座粗糙的防御堡垒。
“I knew he would rise high,” Catelyn said. “He was always clever, even as a boy, but it is one thing to be clever and another to be wise. I wonder what the years have done to him.”
而今凯特琳视线所及，皆已成为繁华城区，豪宅、凉亭、谷仓、砖砌仓库、木屋旅店和市集摊位，酒馆、墓园和妓院，一座接着一座。即使距离尚远，她仍可听见渔市里的喧闹。宽阔的林荫大道，蜿蜒的曲折小街，还有窄得无法容纳两人并肩通行的巷弄穿梭在建筑物之间。圣贝勒大教堂的大理石墙环绕着维桑尼亚丘陵顶，七座水晶塔楼耸立其中。彼端的雷妮丝丘陵上，坐落着龙穴焦黑的残垣断壁，倒塌的巨大圆顶废墟，紧闭一世纪之久的青铜大门。两丘之间，静默姐妹街笔直如箭，坚实的围城高墙则环绕在外。
High overhead, the far-eyes sang out from the rigging. Captain Moreo came scrambling across the deck, giving orders, and all around them the Storm Dancer burst into frenetic activity as King’s Landing slid into view atop its three high hills.
百余座码头罗列水滨，港口里停泊着无数船只。深水渔船和河流渡筏络绎不绝，船夫撑篙往来于黑水湾，商船则源源不断卸下来自布拉佛斯、潘托斯和里斯的货物。凯特琳瞥见王后装饰华丽的游艇，停泊在一艘吃水颇深、船身涂满黑色焦油、从伊班港来的捕鲸船旁边。上游处有十来艘狭长的黄金战船，船帆卷起，铁制撞锤轻轻拍打水面。
Three hundred years ago, Catelyn knew, those heights had been covered with forest, and only a handful of fisherfolk had lived on the north shore of the Blackwater Rush where that deep, swift river flowed into the sea. Then Aegon the Conqueror had sailed from Dragonstone. It was here that his army had put ashore, and there on the highest hill that he built his first crude redoubt of wood and earth.
睥睨这一切的是伊耿丘陵上的红堡。它包括七栋加固钢铁工事的巨大鼓塔，一座硕大无比而冷酷的堡楼，圆顶大厅与密闭桥梁、军营、地牢和谷仓，以及开满箭口的厚重护墙，全是浅红色石头砌成。征服者伊耿当年下令建造这座城堡，他的儿子“残酷梅葛”将之完成。竣工以后，他将每位参与筑城的石匠、木工和建筑师全部斩首，誓言惟有真龙传人方能掌握龙王堡垒的秘密。
Now the city covered the shore as far as Catelyn could see; manses and arbors and granaries, brick storehouses and timbered inns and merchant’s stalls, taverns and graveyards and brothels, all piled one on another. She could hear the clamor of the fish market even at this distance. Between the buildings were broad roads lined with trees, wandering crookback streets, and alleys so narrow that two men could not walk abreast. Visenya’s hill was crowned by the Great Sept of Baelor with its seven crystal towers. Across the city on the hill of Rhaenys stood the blackened walls of the Dragonpit, its huge dome collapsing into ruin, its bronze doors closed now for a century. The Street of the Sisters ran between them, straight as an arrow. The city walls rose in the distance, high and strong.
不想如今，飘扬在城墙上的旗帜却是金黄而非墨黑，三头龙曾经怒吐烈焰的地方，成了拜拉席恩家族的宝冠雄鹿奔驰昂扬的疆域。
A hundred quays lined the waterfront, and the harbor was crowded with ships. Deepwater fishing boats and river runners came and went, ferrymen poled back and forth across the Blackwater Rush, trading galleys unloaded goods from Braavos and Pentos and Lys. Catelyn spied the queen’s ornate barge, tied up beside a fat-bellied whaler from the Port of Ibben, its hull black with tar, while upriver a dozen lean golden warships rested in their cribs, sails furled and cruel iron rams lapping at the water.
一艘来自盛夏群岛的高桅天鹅船，正乘风张满白帆，驶离港口。暴风舞者号从她身边驶过，稳稳地准备靠岸。
And above it all, frowning down from Aegon’s high hill, was the Red Keep; seven huge drum-towers crowned with iron ramparts, an immense grim barbican, vaulted halls and covered bridges, barracks and dungeons and granaries, massive curtain walls studded with archers’ nests, all fashioned of pale red stone. Aegon the Conqueror had commanded it built. His son Maegor the Cruel had seen it completed. Afterward he had taken the heads of every stonemason, woodworker, and builder who had labored on it. Only the blood of the dragon would ever know the secrets of the fortress the Dragonlords had built, he vowed.
“夫人，”罗德利克爵士说，“我趁躺在床上休养这段时间，仔细考虑过下一步该如何行动。首先，您绝对不能进城，由我一个人去把艾伦带到安全的地方见您就好。”
Yet now the banners that flew from its battlements were golden, not black, and where the three-headed dragon had once breathed fire, now pranced the crowned stag of House Baratheon.
帆船驶近码头，她仔细端详着老骑士。莫里欧正用自由贸易城邦粗野的瓦雷利亚方言大声喝令。“你冒的风险不比我少。”
A high-masted swan ship from the Summer Isles was beating out from port, its white sails huge with wind. The Storm Dancer moved past it, pulling steadily for shore.
罗德利克爵士微笑道：“我看不然。早些时候我朝水里的倒影瞧了瞧，差点认不出自己。我母亲是这世上最后一个见过我没留胡子模样的人，而她已经过世了四十年。夫人，我相信我一定安全。”
“My lady,” Ser Rodrik said, “I have thought on how best to proceed while I lay abed. You must not enter the castle. I will go in your stead and bring Ser Aron to you in some safe place.”
莫里欧大声吆喝，六十支桨整齐划一地自水中拉起，然后朝反方向划去。船速减缓，又是一声大喝，桨叶便都缩回船壳里面。船靠码头之后，泰洛西水手立即跳下船拴住缆绳。莫里欧满脸堆笑地跑过来。“夫人，照您吩咐，咱们抵达君临了，我敢打赌从没有一艘船能这么迅速、这么平顺地抵达目标。您可需要派人帮忙把行李搬去城堡？”
She studied the old knight as the galley drew near to a pier. Moreo was shouting in the vulgar Valyrian of the Free Cities. “You would be as much at risk as I would.”
“我们不去城堡，你倒是可以推荐几家干净舒适的旅馆，离河不要太远。”
Ser Rodrik smiled. “I think not. I looked at my reflection in the water earlier and scarcely recognized myself. My mother was the last person to see me without whiskers, and she is forty years dead. I believe I am safe enough, my lady.”
泰洛西船长捻捻绿色的八字胡，“那敢情好，我倒是知道几个符合您要求的店家。不过首先嘛，恕我无礼，咱们约定的旅费还剩一半没付清呢。还有您慷慨答应的额外小费，如果我没记错的话，好像是六十枚银币。”
Moreo bellowed a command. As one, sixty oars lifted from the river, then reversed and backed water. The galley slowed. Another shout. The oars slid back inside the hull. As they thumped against the dock, Tyroshi seamen leapt down to tie up. Moreo came bustling up, all smiles. “King’s Landing, my lady, as you did command, and never has a ship made a swifter or surer passage. Will you be needing assistance to carry your things to the castle?”
“那是给船员的。”凯特琳提醒他。
“We shall not be going to the castle. Perhaps you can suggest an inn, someplace clean and comfortable and not too far from the river.”
“噢，那当然，”莫里欧道，“不过还是我先帮他们保管，等咱们回到泰洛西再分配好了。这可是为他们妻小着想啊，想想看，若是现在就给他们，夫人，他们肯定会赌个精光或拿去买一夜之欢呀。”
The Tyroshi fingered his forked green beard. “Just so. I know of several establishments that might suit your needs. Yet first, if I may be so bold, there is the matter of the second half of the payment we agreed upon. And of course the extra silver you were so kind as to promise. Sixty stags, I believe it was.”
“花花钱也无可厚非，”罗德利克爵士插话，“因为凛冬将至。”
“For the oarmen,” Catelyn reminded him.
“人应该为自己的行为负责。”凯特琳说，“这是他们辛苦挣来的血汗钱，怎么花我无足置喙。”
“Oh, of a certainty,” said Moreo. “Though perhaps I should hold it for them until we return to Tyrosh. For the sake of their wives and children. If you give them the silver here, my lady, they will dice it away or spend it all for a night’s pleasure.”
“那就照您吩咐，夫人。”莫里欧一边打躬作揖一边笑着回答。
“There are worse things to spend money on,” Ser Rodrik put in. “Winter is coming.”
为以防万一，凯特琳把钱当面赏给水手，每人一枚银鹿，至于帮她搬行李的两位海员，则额外多加了两个铜币。他们把东西搬到莫里欧推荐的旅馆，位于维桑尼亚丘陵半腰，据说是鳗鱼巷里的老字号。老板娘是个坏脾气的老妇，先是满腹狐疑地上下打量他们俩，又把凯特琳付的钱币用牙齿咬了又咬，大概在审是不是真的。虽然如此，房间倒是挺宽敞，通风也好，而且莫里欧说她煮的鱼汤七国上下无人能及。最棒的是，她完全不过问客人的名姓。
“A man must make his own choices,” Catelyn said. “They earned the silver. How they spend it is no concern of mine.”
“我想您最好别待在大厅里，”安顿妥当之后，罗德利克爵士说，“即便在这种地方，还是小心为妙。”他穿了环甲，配上匕首和长剑，外面再套上黑斗篷，拉起兜帽。“我天黑以前把艾伦爵士带来。”他保证，“夫人，您好好休息。”
“As you say, my lady,” Moreo replied, bowing and smiling.
凯特琳真的累了。这趟旅途漫长而疲惫，况且她年纪也已不轻。房间的窗户面向一条屋顶之间的小巷，恰可看到远方的黑水湾。她目送罗德利克爵士快步走进熙来攘往的街道，消失在人群当中，最后决定顺从他的建议。床铺塞的是稻草并非羽毛，但她还是头一沾枕便进入梦乡。
Just to be sure, Catelyn paid the oarmen herself, a stag to each man, and a copper to the two men who carried their chests halfway up Visenya’s hill to the inn that Moreo had suggested. It was a rambling old place on Eel Alley. The woman who owned it was a sour crone with a wandering eye who looked them over suspiciously and bit the coin that Catelyn offered her to make sure it was real. Her rooms were large and airy, though, and Moreo swore that her fish stew was the most savory in all the Seven Kingdoms. Best of all, she had no interest in their names.
她被砰砰的敲门声吵醒。
“I think it best if you stay away from the common room,” Ser Rodrik said, after they had settled in. “Even in a place like this, one never knows who may be watching.” He wore ringmail, dagger, and longsword under a dark cloak with a hood he could pull up over his head. “I will be back before nightfall, with Ser Aron,” he promised. “Rest now, my lady.”
凯特琳立时坐起，窗外，夕阳残照把君临的屋顶洒得通红。她睡得比预期的长。房门再度响起敲门声，人声传进屋内：“以国王之名，开门！”
Catelyn was tired. The voyage had been long and fatiguing, and she was no longer as young as she had been. Her windows opened on the alley and rooftops, with a view of the Blackwater beyond. She watched Ser Rodrik set off, striding briskly through the busy streets until he was lost in the crowds, then decided to take his advice. The bedding was stuffed with straw instead of feathers, but she had no trouble falling asleep.
“等等。”她一边应声，一边赶紧用斗篷裹住自己。那把匕首躺在床边桌上，她匆忙拾起，然后才打开厚重木门的门闩。
She woke to a pounding on her door.
蜂拥进房的人都穿着都城守卫队的制服：黑色环甲和金色披风。为首之人一见她手中利刃，便笑道：“夫人，不必如此。我们是特地来护送您进城的。”
Catelyn sat up sharply. Outside the window, the rooftops of King’s Landing were red in the light of the setting sun. She had slept longer than she intended. A fist hammered at her door again, and a voice called out, “Open, in the name of the king.”
“是谁的命令？”她问。
“A moment,” she called out. She wrapped herself in her cloak. The dagger was on the bedside table. She snatched it up before she unlatched the heavy wooden door.
他拿出一条缎带，凯特琳一看，顿时喉头一紧。灰蜡上盖有一只仿声鸟。“培提尔，”她说。想不到他动作这么快，罗德利克爵士肯定出了事。她望着带头的守卫，“你知道我是谁？”
The men who pushed into the room wore the black ringmail and golden cloaks of the City Watch. Their leader smiled at the dagger in her hand and said, “No need for that, m’lady. We’re to escort you to the castle.”
“不知道，夫人。”他回答，“小指头大人只吩咐我们带您去见他，而且绝不能让您受到一点委屈。”
“By whose authority?” she said.
凯特琳点点头：“你去门外等，我换好衣服便来。”
He showed her a ribbon. Catelyn felt her breath catch in her throat. The seal was a mockingbird, in grey wax. “Petyr,” she said. So soon. Something must have happened to Ser Rodrik. She looked at the head guardsman. “Do you know who I am?”
她在水盆里洗了手，又用干净的麻布擦干。她的手指仍然僵硬而不灵活，好容易才穿上胸衣，在颈间系好那件褐色的粗布斗篷。小指头怎么知道她在这里？这绝不会是罗德利克爵士说的。他虽然一把年纪，脾气却倔得紧，忠心耿耿到顽固的地步。难道他们来得太迟，兰尼斯特家已经抢先一步抵达了君临？不可能，倘若真是如此，那么奈德一定也在，他会亲自来接她。这到底是怎么回事？
“No, m’lady,” he said. “M’lord Littlefinger said only to bring you to him, and see that you were not mistreated.”
她恍然大悟：莫里欧。这该死的泰洛西人知道他们的身份，也知道他们下榻处所。她不仅揣摩他为这则消息开了多少价。
Catelyn nodded. “You may wait outside while I dress.”
他们为她备好了马。动身出发时，街上已经点起了灯，凯特琳左右围绕着肩披金色披风的守卫，只觉全城的目光都集中在自己身上。当他们抵达红堡时，铁闸已经降下，入夜后大门也已紧闭，但城堡的窗户里火光摇曳，生气依旧。守卫们把坐骑留在城墙外，护送她从一道狭窄的边门进入，踏着级级阶梯，登上高塔。
She bathed her hands in the basin and wrapped them in clean linen. Her fingers were thick and awkward as she struggled to lace up her bodice and knot a drab brown cloak about her neck. How could Littlefinger have known she was here? Ser Rodrik would never have told him. Old he might be, but he was stubborn, and loyal to a fault. Were they too late, had the Lannisters reached King’s Landing before her? No, if that were true, Ned would be here too, and surely he would have come to her. How …?
房里只有他一个人，坐在一张大木桌边，就着一盏油灯写字。他们把她送进屋内，他便搁下笔望着她。“凯特。”他静静地说。
Then she thought, Moreo . The Tyroshi knew who they were and where they were, damn him. She hoped he’d gotten a good price for the information.
“为什么带我来这儿？”
They had brought a horse for her. The lamps were being lit along the streets as they set out, and Catelyn felt the eyes of the city on her as she rode, surrounded by the guard in their golden cloaks. When they reached the Red Keep, the portcullis was down and the great gates sealed for the night, but the castle windows were alive with flickering lights. The guardsmen left their mounts outside the walls and escorted her through a narrow postern door, then up endless steps to a tower.
他起身朝守卫粗鲁地摆摆手。“你们可以走了。”守卫离开，“没事吧，”待他们走后他才开口，“我可是再三告诫过的。”他注意到她的绷带。“你的手……”
He was alone in the room, seated at a heavy wooden table, an oil lamp beside him as he wrote. When they ushered her inside, he set down his pen and looked at her. “Cat,” he said quietly.
凯特琳故意忽略这个含蓄的问题。“我可不习惯被人当成女佣一般呼来唤去。”她冷冷地说，“小时候的你多少还懂得一点礼貌。”
“Why have I been brought here in this fashion?”
“夫人，我绝对没有冒犯你的意思。”他看似充满悔意，这个神情也勾起凯特琳历历如绘的回忆。他是个狡猾机灵的孩子，但每次闯了祸总会一副悔不当初的模样，他就有这种天生的本事。看来这些年来他没什么改变。培提尔从前是个瘦小的男孩，如今长成一个瘦小的男子，比凯特琳还要矮上一两寸，但纤细敏捷，容貌一如她记忆中那般锐利，还有那双满是笑意的灰绿眼睛。他下巴留了点胡子，黑发间也有几抹银丝，其实人还不到三十。这个特质和他系住披风的银白仿声鸟倒是挺配，他从小就得意自己的少年白。
He rose and gestured brusquely to the guards. “Leave us.” The men departed. “You were not mistreated, I trust,” he said after they had gone. “I gave firm instructions.” He noticed her bandages. “Your hands …”
“你怎么知道我在城里？”她问。
Catelyn ignored the implied question. “I am not accustomed to being summoned like a serving wench,” she said icily. “As a boy, you still knew the meaning of courtesy.”
“因为瓦里斯消息灵通。”培提尔露出一抹促狭的微笑。“他马上就来，我只是想先单独见见你。凯特，我们好久不见，算算，多少年了？”
“I’ve angered you, my lady. That was never my intent.” He looked contrite. The look brought back vivid memories for Catelyn. He had been a sly child, but after his mischiefs he always looked contrite; it was a gift he had. The years had not changed him much. Petyr had been a small boy, and he had grown into a small man, an inch or two shorter than Catelyn, slender and quick, with the sharp features she remembered and the same laughing grey-green eyes. He had a little pointed chin beard now, and threads of silver in his dark hair, though he was still shy of thirty. They went well with the silver mockingbird that fastened his cloak. Even as a child, he had always loved his silver.
凯特琳不理睬他的亲昵，如今她有比这更重要的事情要问。“原来是八爪蜘蛛找到我的。”
“How did you know I was in the city?” she asked him.
小指头皱眉道：“可别当面这样叫他哟。他这人敏感得很，大概和身为太监有关吧。城里的事，瓦里斯不但都知道，还常常未卜先知。到处都有他的眼线，他称呼他们作他的小小鸟儿。他的一只小小鸟听说了你抵达的消息。谢天谢地，瓦里斯知道以后，第一个找的人是我。”
“Lord Varys knows all,” Petyr said with a sly smile. “He will be joining us shortly, but I wanted to see you alone first. It has been too long, Cat. How many years?”
“为什么第一个找你？”
Catelyn ignored his familiarity. There were more important questions. “So it was the King’s Spider who found me.”
他耸耸肩。“为什么不呢？我是财政大臣，也是国王的御前顾问。赛尔弥和蓝礼公爵到北边去迎接劳勃，史坦尼斯大人回了龙石岛，只剩下派席尔国师和我。我是当然的选择，何况瓦里斯知道我还是你妹妹莱莎的朋友。”
Littlefinger winced. “You don’t want to call him that. He’s very sensitive. Comes of being an eunuch, I imagine. Nothing happens in this city without Varys knowing. Ofttimes he knows about it before it happens. He has informants everywhere. His little birds, he calls them. One of his little birds heard about your visit. Thankfully, Varys came to me first.”
“那瓦里斯知不知道……”
“Why you?”
“瓦里斯大人什么都知道……惟独不知道你为什么造访。”他抬起一边眉毛。“你到底为什么造访？”
He shrugged. “Why not me? I am master of coin, the king’s own councillor. Selmy and Lord Renly rode north to meet Robert, and Lord Stannis is gone to Dragonstone, leaving only Maester Pycelle and me. I was the obvious choice. I was ever a friend to your sister Lysa, Varys knows that.”
“作妻子的想念丈夫，作母亲的挂念女儿。我来拜访，有何不妥？”
“Does Varys know about …”
小指头笑道：“呵呵，我说夫人，这借口不赖，可惜我不相信。我太了解你了。你们徒利家族的箴言是什么来着？”
“Lord Varys knows everything … except why you are here.” He lifted an eyebrow. “Why are you here?”
她喉咙一干。“家族，责任，荣誉。”她僵硬地复诵。他的确是太了解她了。
“A wife is allowed to yearn for her husband, and if a mother needs her daughters close, who can tell her no?”
“家族，责任，荣誉。”他应道，“这每一项都要求你遵照首相嘱咐留在临冬城。夫人哪，我看事情没这么简单。若非事关紧要，你不会这样突然来访。就请你把话说出来吧，让我为你效劳，老朋友本该戮力相助。”这时门上传来一声轻响。“请进。”小指头叫道。
Littlefinger laughed. “Oh, very good, my lady, but please don’t expect me to believe that. I know you too well. What were the Tully words again?”
进来的的男子体态丰腴，脂粉味十足，头上光溜得像颗蛋。他身着一件宽松的紫色丝质长袍，外罩金丝线缝制的背心，脚踏前尖后宽的天鹅绒软拖鞋。“史塔克夫人，”他双掌执起她的手，“阔别多年，不料今日相见，真是叫人欢欣鼓舞。”他的皮肤柔软而湿润，呼吸有丁香花的味道。“哎呀，您的手是怎么了？亲爱的夫人，敢情您不小心给烫到了？如此纤纤玉手竟然……咱们派席尔大学士调制的药膏疗效一流，要不我这就差人给您送一罐？”
Her throat was dry. “Family, Duty, Honor,” she recited stiffly. He did know her too well.
凯特琳从他掌心抽回手，“伯爵大人，感谢您的美意，不过我这伤口已经让家里的鲁温师傅处理过了。”
“Family, Duty, Honor,” he echoed. “All of which required you to remain in Winterfell, where our Hand left you. No, my lady, something has happened. This sudden trip of yours bespeaks a certain urgency. I beg of you, let me help. Old sweet friends should never hesitate to rely upon each other.” There was a soft knock on the door. “Enter,” Littlefinger called out.
瓦里斯低头道：“您公子的事，我深感遗憾。一想到他小小年纪，就觉得天上诸神真是残酷。”
The man who stepped through the door was plump, perfumed, powdered, and as hairless as an egg. He wore a vest of woven gold thread over a loose gown of purple silk, and on his feet were pointed slippers of soft velvet. “Lady Stark,” he said, taking her hand in both of his, “to see you again after so many years is such a joy.” His flesh was soft and moist, and his breath smelled of lilacs. “Oh, your poor hands. Have you burned yourself, sweet lady? The fingers are so delicate … Our good Maester Pycelle makes a marvelous salve, shall I send for a jar?”
瓦里斯伯爵，我们总算有点共识。“她说。瓦里斯的伯爵头衔只是虚位，这也是为了顾及他朝廷重臣的身份，其实瓦里斯根本不是任何封邑的领主，他统御的不过是手下那批眼线。
Catelyn slid her fingers from his grasp. “I thank you, my lord, but my own Maester Luwin has already seen to my hurts.”
太监把手软软地一摊。“好夫人，相信我们不只是有这点共识。我对您丈夫，也就是咱们新任首相，怀着极高的敬意，同时我也知道我们大家都非常爱戴劳勃国王。”
Varys bobbed his head. “I was grievous sad to hear about your son. And him so young. The gods are cruel.”
“是的，”她不得不说，“毫无疑问。”
“On that we agree, Lord Varys,” she said. The title was but a courtesy due him as a council member; Varys was lord of nothing but the spiderweb, the master of none but his whisperers.
“要找咱们劳勃这么受爱戴的国王，恐怕很难啰。”小指头露出促狭的微笑，酸溜溜地说，“最起码瓦里斯大人听到是这样。”
The eunuch spread his soft hands. “On more than that, I hope, sweet lady. I have great esteem for your husband, our new Hand, and I know we do both love King Robert.”
“好夫人，”瓦里斯忧心忡忡地道，“自由贸易城邦有不少精通医术的奇人异士。只消您点个头，我即刻去找这样的人来医治您的小布兰。”
“Yes,” she was forced to say. “For a certainty.”
“能做的鲁温师傅都做了。”她告诉他。此时此地她不愿谈布兰的事，尤其是和这些人。她不太信任小指头，更何况瓦里斯。她绝不能让他们看见她悲伤的模样。“贝里席大人刚才告诉我，我现在能在这里，全都要归功于您。”
“Never has a king been so beloved as our Robert,” quipped Littlefinger. He smiled slyly. “At least in Lord Varys’s hearing.”
瓦里斯像个小女孩般咯咯直笑。“呵呵，可不是嘛。我看我是难辞其咎了，好心的夫人，希望您原谅我吧。”他悠闲地找了张椅子坐下，双手交握，“我在想，不知能否请您让我们瞧瞧那把匕首呐？”
“Good lady,” Varys said with great solicitude. “There are men in the Free Cities with wondrous healing powers. Say only the word, and I will send for one for your dear Bran.”
凯特琳·史塔克惊愕地看着他，不敢相信自己所听到的话。他真的是只无孔不入的蜘蛛，说不定还是个懂得妖术的魔法师，她不禁狂乱地暗想。他竟然知道没有人会知道的事，除非……“你把罗德利克爵士怎样了？”她质问。
“Maester Luwin is doing all that can be done for Bran,” she told him. She would not speak of Bran, not here, not with these men. She trusted Littlefinger only a little, and Varys not at all. She would not let them see her grief. “Lord Baelish tells me that I have you to thank for bringing me here.”
小指头一头雾水。“我觉得自己像个上了战场却没带长枪的骑士。这匕首是怎么回事？罗德利克爵士又是何方神圣？”
Varys giggled like a little girl. “Oh, yes. I suppose I am guilty. I hope you forgive me, kind lady.” He eased himself down into a seat and put his hands together. “I wonder if we might trouble you to show us the dagger?”
“罗德利克·凯索爵士是临冬城的教头，”瓦里斯告诉他，“史塔克夫人，您大可放心，这位好骑士平安无事。他今天下午的确来过一趟，到兵器库去拜访了艾伦·桑塔加爵士，两人谈及一把匕首。约莫日落时分，他们结伴离开城堡，徒步返回您下榻的那间粗陋房舍。这会儿他们还在那里，正在大厅里喝酒，等您回去。罗德利克爵士发现您不在，可是焦虑得紧哪。”
Catelyn Stark stared at the eunuch in stunned disbelief. He was a spider, she thought wildly, an enchanter or worse. He knew things no one could possibly know, unless … “What have you done to Ser Rodrik?” she demanded.
“你怎么会知道这些事？”
Littlefinger was lost. “I feel rather like the knight who arrives at the battle without his lance. What dagger are we talking about? Who is Ser Rodrik?”
“小小鸟儿叽叽喳喳传来的呗。”瓦里斯微笑道，“好夫人，我的职责所在便是打听消息，所以我才知道不少。”他耸耸肩。“不过您确实把匕首带在了身上，对吧？”
“Ser Rodrik Cassel is master-at-arms at Winterfell,” Varys informed him. “I assure you, Lady Stark, nothing at all has been done to the good knight. He did call here early this afternoon. He visited with Ser Aron Santagar in the armory, and they talked of a certain dagger. About sunset, they left the castle together and walked to that dreadful hovel where you were staying. They are still there, drinking in the common room, waiting for your return. Ser Rodrik was very distressed to find you gone.”
凯特琳从斗篷里抽出匕首，扔到他面前的桌上。“拿去看罢，或许你的小小鸟也会告诉你这匕首的主人是谁。”
“How could you know all that?”
瓦里斯用夸张的优雅姿势拿起短刀，然后伸出拇指滑过刀锋，没想到立时见血，他惊呼一声，手一松，匕首掉回桌上。
“The whisperings of little birds,” Varys said, smiling. “I know things, sweet lady. That is the nature of my service.” He shrugged. “You do have the dagger with you, yes?”
“小心，”凯特琳告诉他，“这匕首很利。”
Catelyn pulled it out from beneath her cloak and threw it down on the table in front of him. “Here. Perhaps your little birds will whisper the name of the man it belongs to.”
“世上最锋利的莫过于瓦雷利亚钢。”小指头道。瓦里斯一边吸吮血流不止的拇指，一边面带愠色地瞪着凯特琳。小指头拿起利刃，轻轻地把玩，测试称手的程度。随后把匕首抛至半空，再用另一只手接住。“轻重恰到好处。您这次来访的目的，便是想查出匕首的主人？夫人，那您大可不必去找艾伦爵士，您应该直接来问我。”
Varys lifted the knife with exaggerated delicacy and ran a thumb along its edge. Blood welled, and he let out a squeal and dropped the dagger back on the table.
“假如我直接问你，”她说，“你怎么说？”
“Careful,” Catelyn told him, “it’s sharp.”
“我会告诉你这种刀全君临只有一把，”他用拇指和食指夹起刀刃，举过肩头，手腕一抖，熟练地将匕首朝房间对面射去。短刀正中房门，深深地插进橡木板，随着残余的劲道晃动不止。“它是我的。”
“Nothing holds an edge like Valyrian steel,” Littlefinger said as Varys sucked at his bleeding thumb and looked at Catelyn with sullen admonition. Littlefinger hefted the knife lightly in his hand, testing the grip. He flipped it in the air, caught it again with his other hand. “Such sweet balance. You want to find the owner, is that the reason for this visit? You have no need of Ser Aron for that, my lady. You should have come to me.”
“这是你的刀？”不可能，培提尔根本没去临冬城。
“And if I had,” she said, “what would you have told me?”
“一直到乔佛里王子命名日那天的比武大会为止，”他穿过房间，从木门上拔出匕首。“我和半数的廷臣都赌詹姆爵士会赢得长枪比试，”培提尔露出羞怯的笑，突然又显得孩子气。“所以当洛拉斯·提利尔爵士把他一枪刺下马时，我们都输了点小东西。詹姆爵士输掉一百枚金龙币，王后赔上一条翡翠首饰，而我则是这把刀。赢家放过了王后陛下的翡翠，但把其他东西都留下了。”
“I would have told you that there was only one knife like this at King’s Landing.” He grasped the blade between thumb and forefinger, drew it back over his shoulder, and threw it across the room with a practiced flick of his wrist. It struck the door and buried itself deep in the oak, quivering. “It’s mine.”
“此人是谁？”凯特琳质问，她的嘴巴因恐惧而干涩，手指头则因回忆而隐隐作痛。
“Yours?” It made no sense. Petyr had not been at Winterfell.
“小恶魔，”小指头说。瓦里斯伯爵在一旁看着她的脸。“提利昂·兰尼斯特。”
“Until the tourney on Prince Joffrey’s name day,” he said, crossing the room to wrench the dagger from the wood. “I backed Ser Jaime in the jousting, along with half the court.” Petyr’s sheepish grin made him look half a boy again. “When Loras Tyrell unhorsed him, many of us became a trifle poorer. Ser Jaime lost a hundred golden dragons, the queen lost an emerald pendant, and I lost my knife. Her Grace got the emerald back, but the winner kept the rest.”
第二十章 琼恩
“Who?” Catelyn demanded, her mouth dry with fear. Her fingers ached with remembered pain.
刀剑铿锵响彻广场。
“The Imp,” said Littlefinger as Lord Varys watched her face. “Tyrion Lannister.”
琼恩穿着黑羊毛衫，外罩皮革背心和锁子甲，内里汗如雨下。他向前进逼，葛兰脚步不稳地后退，笨拙地举剑格挡。他刚举剑，琼恩便猛力一挥攻他下盘，击中他的脚，打得他步伐踉跄。葛兰向下还击，头上却挨了一记过肩砍，将他的头盔打凹。他又使出一记侧劈，结果琼恩拨开他的剑，然后用戴了护腕的手肘撞击他的腹部。葛兰重心不稳，狠狠地跌坐在雪地里。琼恩跟上砍中他的腕关节，痛得他惨叫一声丢下剑。
*JON
“够了！”艾里沙·索恩爵士的话音如瓦雷利亚刀锋裂空。
T he courtyard rang to the song of swords.
葛兰揉着手道：“这野种把我手腕打脱臼了。”
Under black wool, boiled leather, and mail, sweat trickled icily down Jon’s chest as he pressed the attack. Grenn stumbled backward, defending himself clumsily. When he raised his sword, Jon went underneath it with a sweeping blow that crunched against the back of the other boy’s leg and sent him staggering. Grenn’s downcut was answered by an overhand that dented his helm. When he tried a sideswing, Jon swept aside his blade and slammed a mailed forearm into his chest. Grenn lost his footing and sat down hard in the snow. Jon knocked his sword from his fingers with a slash to his wrist that brought a cry of pain.
“假如用的真剑，野种早已挑断你的腿筋，劈开你的脑袋瓜子，砍断你的双手了。算你走运，我们守夜人需要的不只是游骑兵，也需要马房小弟。”艾里沙爵士朝杰伦和陶德挥手道：“把这头笨牛扶起来，他可以准备办丧事了。”
“Enough!” Ser Alliser Thorne had a voice with an edge like Valyrian steel.
其他的男孩搀扶葛兰起身，琼恩脱下头盔，结霜的晨气吹在脸上，感觉很舒服。他拄剑而立，深吸一口气，容许自己短暂地享受胜利的喜悦。
Grenn cradled his hand. “The bastard broke my wrist.”
“那是剑，不是老人的拐杖。”艾里沙爵士尖锐地说，“雪诺大人，您可是脚痛？”
“The bastard hamstrung you, opened your empty skull, and cut off your hand. Or would have, if these blades had an edge. It’s fortunate for you that the Watch needs stableboys as well as rangers.” Ser Alliser gestured at Jeren and Toad. “Get the Aurochs on his feet, he has funeral arrangements to make.”
琼恩恨透了这个绰号，打从他练剑的第一天起，艾里沙爵士便这么叫他。其他男孩子有样学样，现在人人都这么称呼他了。他将长剑回鞘。“不是。”
Jon took off his helm as the other boys were pulling Grenn to his feet. The frosty morning air felt good on his face. He leaned on his sword, drew a deep breath, and allowed himself a moment to savor the victory.
索恩大跨步朝他走来，脆硬的黑皮革发出悉悉窣窣的声响。他约莫五十岁，体格结实，精瘦而严峻，一头黑发已有些灰白，而那双眼睛却如玛瑙般炯炯有神。“那是怎么回事？”他质问。
“That is a longsword, not an old man’s cane,” Ser Alliser said sharply. “Are your legs hurting, Lord Snow?”
“我累了。”琼恩承认。他的臂膀因为不断挥剑而感到酸麻，如今打斗结束，刚留下的擦伤也开始痛了起来。
Jon hated that name, a mockery that Ser Alliser had hung on him the first day he came to practice. The boys had picked it up, and now he heard it everywhere. He slid the longsword back into its scabbard. “No,” he replied.
“这叫软弱。”
Thorne strode toward him, crisp black leathers whispering faintly as he moved. He was a compact man of fifty years, spare and hard, with grey in his black hair and eyes like chips of onyx. “The truth now,” he commanded.
“可我赢了。”
“I’m tired,” Jon admitted. His arm burned from the weight of the longsword, and he was starting to feel his bruises now that the fight was done.
“不。是笨牛他输了。”
“What you are is weak.”
一个旁观的男孩在偷偷窃笑。琼恩很清楚自己绝不能顶嘴。虽然他击败了每一个艾里沙爵士派来对付他的对手，却还是得不到应有的待遇。教头的嘴边只有嘲笑和讥讽。索恩一定是讨厌他，琼恩暗自认为；不过话说回来，索恩更讨厌其他男孩。
“I won.”
“今天就到此为止。”索恩告诉他们。“我对饭桶可没什么耐性。假如哪天异鬼真打过来，我倒希望他们带上弓箭，因为你们只配当靶子。”
“No. The Aurochs lost.”
琼恩跟着其他人返回兵器库，孤零零地走在中间。他一直都孤零零的。一起受训的小队约有二十人，却没有一个称得上是朋友。多数人长他两三岁，打起来却连十四岁罗柏的一半都比不上。戴利恩动作敏捷，但很怕挨打；派普老把剑当匕首来使；杰伦弱得像个女孩子；葛兰迟钝又笨拙；霍德攻势虽猛，可总是没头没脑。琼恩越是和这些人交手，就越鄙视他们。
One of the other boys sniggered. Jon knew better than to reply. He had beaten everyone that Ser Alliser had sent against him, yet it gained him nothing. The master-at-arms served up only derision. Thorne hated him, Jon had decided; of course, he hated the other boys even worse.
进到室内，琼恩把入鞘的剑挂回石墙的钩子上，刻意不理睬其他人。他有条不紊地解下盔甲、皮衣和汗湿的羊毛衫。长长的房间两端，铁火盆里的煤炭熊熊燃烧，但琼恩仍止不住发抖。此地，寒意总是如影随形，想必数年之后他便会忘记温暖的滋味。
“That will be all,” Thorne told them. “I can only stomach so much ineptitude in any one day. If the Others ever come for us, I pray they have archers, because you lot are fit for nothing more than arrow fodder.”
他穿上日常的粗布黑衣，倦怠感突然排山倒海般朝他袭来。他找条板凳坐下，手指摸索着系上斗篷。好冷啊，他一边想，一边回忆起临冬城的厅堂，那里有温泉终年流贯壁垒之间，仿如人体内流淌的血液。黑城堡里没有暖意，只有冰冷的墙壁，和更加冷漠的人。
Jon followed the rest back to the armory, walking alone. He often walked alone here. There were almost twenty in the group he trained with, yet not one he could call a friend. Most were two or three years his senior, yet not one was half the fighter Robb had been at fourteen. Dareon was quick but afraid of being hit. Pyp used his sword like a dagger, Jeren was weak as a girl, Grenn slow and clumsy. Halder’s blows were brutally hard but he ran right into your attacks. The more time he spent with them, the more Jon despised them.
除了提利昂·兰尼斯特，没人对他提过守夜人部队竟是这副光景。那侏儒在他们北上途中把事情真相告诉了他，但那时已经太迟了。琼恩不禁怀疑父亲知不知道长城守军的真正情形。他一定知道，想到这里他更觉心痛。
Inside, Jon hung sword and scabbard from a hook in the stone wall, ignoring the others around him. Methodically, he began to strip off his mail, leather, and sweat-soaked woolens. Chunks of coal burned in iron braziers at either end of the long room, but Jon found himself shivering. The chill was always with him here. In a few years he would forget what it felt like to be warm.
就连叔叔，竟也这么把他遗弃在这世界尽头的冰冷寒荒。他原先所认识的那个个性温和的班扬·史塔克，到这里完全变了个人。他是首席游骑兵，整日与莫尔蒙总司令，伊蒙学士和其他高级官员为伍，而将琼恩丢给坏脾气的艾里沙·索恩爵士。
The weariness came on him suddenly, as he donned the roughspun blacks that were their everyday wear. He sat on a bench, his fingers fumbling with the fastenings on his cloak. So cold , he thought, remembering the warm halls of Winterfell, where the hot waters ran through the walls like blood through a man’s body. There was scant warmth to be found in Castle Black; the walls were cold here, and the people colder.
他们抵达长城三天后，琼恩听说班扬·史塔克将率领六名手下深入鬼影森林巡察。当天夜里，他在城堡的木造大厅中找到叔叔，央求他带自己一道去。班扬直截了当地回绝了他。“这可不是临冬城，”他边用刀叉切肉边对他说，“在长城守军里，想得到什么样的待遇，就得证明自己有什么样的本事。琼恩，你还不是游骑兵，你只是个稚气未脱，身上还残留着夏天气味的小鬼。”
No one had told him the Night’s Watch would be like this; no one except Tyrion Lannister. The dwarf had given him the truth on the road north, but by then it had been too late. Jon wondered if his father had known what the Wall would be like. He must have, he thought; that only made it hurt the worse.
琼恩愚蠢地争辩：“到明年命名日我就满十五岁，”他说，“很快就要长大成人了。”
Even his uncle had abandoned him in this cold place at the end of the world. Up here, the genial Benjen Stark he had known became a different person. He was First Ranger, and he spent his days and nights with Lord Commander Mormont and Maester Aemon and the other high officers, while Jon was given over to the less than tender charge of Ser Alliser Thorne.
班扬·史塔克皱眉道：“在艾里沙爵士判定你成为守夜人部队的汉子之前，你都只是个小鬼，只能是个小鬼。假如你以为仗着自己史塔克家人的身份，就可以坐享其成，那就大错而特错。我们宣誓入伍时，早已断绝一切身家背景。拿你父亲来说，虽然他会永远在我心中占据一席之地，但如今这些人才是我的手足兄弟。”他拿匕首朝身边的人比划两下，指指这些饱经风霜的黑衣战士。
Three days after their arrival, Jon had heard that Benjen Stark was to lead a half-dozen men on a ranging into the haunted forest. That night he sought out his uncle in the great timbered common hall and pleaded to go with him. Benjen refused him curtly. “This is not Winterfell,” he told him as he cut his meat with fork and dagger. “On the Wall, a man gets only what he earns. You’re no ranger, Jon, only a green boy with the smell of summer still on you.”
翌日拂晓，琼恩起身目送他叔叔离去。叔叔手下一名高大而丑陋的游骑兵一边装配马鞍，一边高唱歌词猥亵的曲子，吐出的气息在清晨的冷气里蒸腾。班扬·史塔克对他是满脸笑容，对自己侄子却没好气。“琼恩，你要我说多少遍？你不能去，等我回来我们再找时间谈谈。”
Stupidly, Jon argued. “I’ll be fifteen on my name day,” he said. “Almost a man grown.”
琼恩看着叔叔牵马走进隧道，向北而去，不禁想起提利昂·兰尼斯特在国王大道上告诉过他的事，脑海里接连浮现出班扬·史塔克倒卧雪地，血迹斑斑的情景。这个念头令他反胃。我究竟成了个什么人？
Benjen Stark frowned. “A boy you are, and a boy you’ll remain until Ser Alliser says you are fit to be a man of the Night’s Watch. If you thought your Stark blood would win you easy favors, you were wrong. We put aside our old families when we swear our vows. Your father will always have a place in my heart, but these are my brothers now.” He gestured with his dagger at the men around them, all the hard cold men in black.
之后他在孤单的卧室里找到白灵，把脸深深地埋进他厚厚的白毛皮。
Jon rose at dawn the next day to watch his uncle leave. One of his rangers, a big ugly man, sang a bawdy song as he saddled his garron, his breath steaming in the cold morning air. Ben Stark smiled at that, but he had no smile for his nephew. “How often must I tell you no, Jon? We’ll speak when I return.”
既然他注定孤单，他便要化寂寞为力量。黑城堡没有神木林，只有一间小小的圣堂和醉醺醺的修士，但琼恩实在无心向神明祷告，管他是新神还是旧神。他心里认为，倘若诸神真的存在，想必也是和这里的严冬一样残酷无情罢。
As he watched his uncle lead his horse into the tunnel, Jon had remembered the things that Tyrion Lannister told him on the kingsroad, and in his mind’s eye he saw Ben Stark lying dead, his blood red on the snow. The thought made him sick. What was he becoming? Afterward he sought out Ghost in the loneliness of his cell, and buried his face in his thick white fur.
他想念自己真正的兄弟：小瑞肯想吃甜食时眼瞳闪闪发亮的神情；罗柏是他最旗鼓相当的对手，也是他最要好的朋友和玩伴；固执又充满好奇心的布兰，不论琼恩和罗柏做些什么，他总想插一脚。他也想念两个妹妹，甚至包括那个自从懂得“私生子”的意思之后，就只肯以“我的同父异母哥哥”来称呼他的珊莎。至于艾莉亚……这个老是磨破膝盖，满头乱发，不然就是钩破衣服，一股牛脾气的瘦巴巴小东西，他想念她的程度甚至超过罗柏。艾莉亚和他一样，永远与环境格格不入……但她总有办法让琼恩会心一笑。此时琼恩愿意付出一切，只换取能和她重聚片刻，再拨弄她的乱发，再看她扮起鬼脸，再听她和自己心有灵犀地说出同一句话。
If he must be alone, he would make solitude his armor. Castle Black had no godswood, only a small sept and a drunken septon, but Jon could not find it in him to pray to any gods, old or new. If they were real, he thought, they were as cruel and implacable as winter.
“小杂种，你把我弄脱臼了。”
He missed his true brothers: little Rickon, bright eyes shining as he begged for a sweet; Robb, his rival and best friend and constant companion; Bran, stubborn and curious, always wanting to follow and join in whatever Jon and Robb were doing. He missed the girls too, even Sansa, who never called him anything but “my half brother” since she was old enough to understand what bastard meant. And Arya … he missed her even more than Robb, skinny little thing that she was, all scraped knees and tangled hair and torn clothes, so fierce and willful. Arya never seemed to fit, no more than he had … yet she could always make Jon smile. He would give anything to be with her now, to muss up her hair once more and watch her make a face, to hear her finish a sentence with him.
琼恩抬眼朝那充满怒意的声源望去。葛兰脸红脖子粗地高高站在他面前，身后还有三个跟班。他认出生得既矮且丑，还有副难听嗓音的陶德，新兵们都叫他癞哈蟆。琼恩想起另外两个家伙是五指半岛地方逮着的强奸犯，被尤伦带到北方来的，不过他忘记名字了。他想尽办法不和他们说话，他们全都是生性残忍的恶霸，从不知荣誉为何物。
“You broke my wrist, bastard boy.”
琼恩霍地起身。“你如果好好求我，我很乐意帮你把另一只手也打断。”葛兰今年十六岁，整整比琼恩高出一头。他们个头都比他大，但吓不了他。他在校场上早就教训过每一个人。
Jon lifted his eyes at the sullen voice. Grenn loomed over him, thick of neck and red of face, with three of his friends behind him. He knew Todder, a short ugly boy with an unpleasant voice. The recruits all called him Toad. The other two were the ones Yoren had brought north with them, Jon remembered, rapers taken down in the Fingers. He’d forgotten their names. He hardly ever spoke to them, if he could help it. They were brutes and bullies, without a thimble of honor between them.
“说不定断手的是你哦。”其中一名强奸犯道。
Jon stood up. “I’ll break the other one for you if you ask nicely.” Grenn was sixteen and a head taller than Jon. All four of them were bigger than he was, but they did not scare him. He’d beaten every one of them in the yard.
“有种你便试试。”琼恩伸手拿剑，但对方中的一人抓住他的手，扭到背后。
“Maybe we’ll break you,” one of the rapers said.
“你老让我们难看。”癞哈蟆抱怨。
“Try.” Jon reached back for his sword, but one of them grabbed his arm and twisted it behind his back.
“咱们没打照面以前，你们就够难看啦。”琼恩告诉他们。抓住他手的男孩用力往后一拧，剧痛立刻直穿脑际，但琼恩依旧不吭一声。
“You make us look bad,” complained Toad.
癞哈蟆向前逼近几步。“咱们小少爷生了张碎嘴，”他说。他生得一双小而亮的猪眼睛。“小杂种，是不是你娘传给你的啊？她是做什么来着的，敢情是个婊子？告诉我她花名叫啥，搞不好老子干过她几回嘞。”他咧嘴笑道。
“You looked bad before I ever met you,” Jon told him. The boy who had his arm jerked upward on him, hard. Pain lanced through him, but Jon would not cry out.
琼恩像条鳗鱼般地用力一扭，后脚跟朝抓住他的男孩胯下狠狠踢去。身后传来一声惨叫，然后他便挣脱了。他朝癞哈蟆扑过去，一拳把他打得翻过长板凳，他穷追不舍，跳上对方胸膛，两手掐紧脖子，使劲往地面撞。
Toad stepped close. “The little lordling has a mouth on him,” he said. He had pig eyes, small and shiny. “Is that your mommy’s mouth, bastard? What was she, some whore? Tell us her name. Maybe I had her a time or two.” He laughed.
两个五指半岛来的家伙拉开他，粗暴地把他摔倒在地，葛兰开始踢他。琼恩正要滚离他们的拳打脚踢，只听一个宏钟般的声音划过兵器库的阴霾：“通通给我住手！马上停手！”
Jon twisted like an eel and slammed a heel down across the instep of the boy holding him. There was a sudden cry of pain, and he was free. He flew at Toad, knocked him backward over a bench, and landed on his chest with both hands on his throat, slamming his head against the packed earth.
琼恩爬起来，唐纳·诺伊怒视着他们，“要打架到场子里去打，”武器师傅说，“别把你们的恩怨带进我的兵器库，否则别怪我插手。相信我，你们不会喜欢的。”
The two from the Fingers pulled him off, throwing him roughly to the ground. Grenn began to kick at him. Jon was rolling away from the blows when a booming voice cut through the gloom of the armory. “STOP THIS! NOW!”
癞哈蟆坐在地上，小心翼翼摸摸后脑勺，只见手指上全是血。“他想杀我。”
Jon pulled himself to his feet. Donal Noye stood glowering at them. “The yard is for fighting,” the armorer said. “Keep your quarrels out of my armory, or I’ll make them my quarrels. You won’t like that.”
“是真的，俺亲眼看到的。”其中一名强奸犯说。
Toad sat on the floor, gingerly feeling the back of his head. His fingers came away bloody. “He tried to kill me.”
“他把我的手给打断了。”葛兰边说边举起手给诺伊看。
“ ’S true. I saw it,” one of the rapers put in.
武器师傅瞟了他手腕一眼，“我看只是擦伤，顶多扭到，伊蒙师傅那里有的是好膏药。陶德，你跟他一块去，头上的伤注意一下。其他人回营去。雪诺留下。”
“He broke my wrist,” Grenn said again, holding it out to Noye for inspection.
琼恩重重地坐回长板凳，不理睬其他人离去时的眼神，那眼神仿佛在向他保证事情没这么容易解决。他的手一阵抽痛。
The armorer gave the offered wrist the briefest of glances. “A bruise. Perhaps a sprain. Maestor Aemon will give you a salve. Go with him, Todder, that head wants looking after. The rest of you, return to your cells. Not you, Snow. You stay.”
“守夜人需要每一份力量，”待他人都离开后，唐纳·诺伊道，“甚至像是癞哈蟆这种人。杀了他，你也没什么光荣可言。”
Jon sat heavily on the long wooden bench as the others left, oblivious to the looks they gave him, the silent promises of future retribution. His arm was throbbing.
琼恩怒火中烧。“他说我妈是——”
“The Watch has need of every man it can get,” Donal Noye said when they were alone. “Even men like Toad. You won’t win any honors killing him.”
“——是个婊子。我听到了。那又如何？”
Jon’s anger flared. “He said my mother was—”
“艾德·史塔克公爵才不是会去逛窑子的人，”琼恩冷冷地说，“他的荣誉——”
“—a whore. I heard him. What of it?”
“——免不了他在外面生出个私生子，不是么？”
“Lord Eddard Stark was not a man to sleep with whores,” Jon said icily. “His honor—”
琼恩气得浑身发冷。“我可以走了吗？”
“—did not prevent him from fathering a bastard. Did it?”
“我说可以你才可以。”
Jon was cold with rage. “Can I go?”
琼恩恨恨地盯着火盆升起的白烟，直到诺伊伸出粗壮的手托住他下巴，把他的头粗暴地扭过来。“小子，我跟你说话的时候看着我。”
“You go when I tell you to go.”
于是琼恩看着他。武器师傅的胸膛宽阔得像个酒桶，肚子更是大得惊人。他的鼻子又宽又扁，那一脸胡子好似从来没刮。他的黑羊毛外衣左襟用一个长剑形状的别针系在肩头。“光嘴巴上说说，你妈也不会变成婊子。她是什么样的人，就是什么样的人，和癞哈蟆怎么说有何干系。话说回来，咱们部队里还真有些人的娘是婊子。”
Jon stared sullenly at the smoke rising from the brazier, until Noye took him under the chin, thick fingers twisting his head around. “Look at me when I’m talking to you, boy.”
我妈可不是，琼恩倔强地暗想。他对自己的母亲一无所知，艾德·史塔克绝口不提关于她的事情。但他经常梦见她，次数频繁到他几乎可以拼凑出她的容貌。梦中的她出身高贵，美丽动人，眼神慈蔼。
Jon looked. The armorer had a chest like a keg of ale and a gut to match. His nose was flat and broad, and he always seemed in need of a shave. The left sleeve of his black wool tunic was fastened at the shoulder with a silver pin in the shape of a longsword. “Words won’t make your mother a whore. She was what she was, and nothing Toad says can change that. You know, we have men on the Wall whose mothers were whores.”
“你以为自己是大贵族的私生子，就觉得特别难受？”武器师傅继续下去，“告诉你，杰伦那家伙是个六根不净的教士的野种。卡特·派克是个酒馆女侍的儿子，结果现在人家是东海望守备队长。”
Not my mother , Jon thought stubbornly. He knew nothing of his mother; Eddard Stark would not talk of her. Yet he dreamed of her at times, so often that he could almost see her face. In his dreams, she was beautiful, and highborn, and her eyes were kind.
“我不在乎，”琼恩道，“我才不管他们怎样，我也不管你或索恩或班扬·史塔克或是谁谁谁怎么样。我恨死这地方了。这里……这里好冷。”
“You think you had it hard, being a high lord’s bastard?” the armorer went on. “That boy Jeren is a septon’s get, and Cotter Pyke is the baseborn son of a tavern wench. Now he commands Eastwatch by the Sea.”
“是啊，又冷又苦又险恶，这就是长城的景况，也是这里守军的写照。绝不像你奶妈所说的睡前故事。哼，去他的睡前故事，去你的奶妈罢，事情就是这样子，而你一辈子都跟我们其他人一起，注定要待在这儿了。”
“I don’t care,” Jon said. “I don’t care about them and I don’t care about you or Thorne or Benjen Stark or any of it. I hate it here. It’s too … it’s cold.”
“一辈子。”琼恩苦涩地重复。武器师傅可以拿一辈子来大做文章，因为他见过世面，经历过大风大浪。他是在风息堡之围中失去了一条胳膊后才加入黑衫军的，在那之前他是国王的大弟史坦尼斯·拜拉席恩的铁匠。他足迹遍布七国，吃过山珍海味，尝过女人的甜美，打过不知几百场大小战役。据说劳勃国王在三叉戟河上杀死雷加·坦格利安那把战锤，正是唐纳·诺伊所铸造。他已经做过琼恩永远也不可能做到的事，等到年过三十，却因一记轻微的斧伤发炎溃烂，最后不得不截掉整只手。也就是在他成了残废，这辈子的幸运已经结束的时候，唐纳·诺伊才来到长城。
“Yes. Cold and hard and mean, that’s the Wall, and the men who walk it. Not like the stories your wet nurse told you. Well, piss on the stories and piss on your wet nurse. This is the way it is, and you’re here for life, same as the rest of us.”
“是啊，雪诺，一辈子。”诺伊道，“或长或短，操之你手。照你现在这种态度，早晚会有弟兄半夜割了你喉咙。”
“Life,” Jon repeated bitterly. The armorer could talk about life. He’d had one. He’d only taken the black after he’d lost an arm at the siege of Storm’s End. Before that he’d smithed for Stannis Baratheon, the king’s brother. He’d seen the Seven Kingdoms from one end to the other; he’d feasted and wenched and fought in a hundred battles. They said it was Donal Noye who’d forged King Robert’s warhammer, the one that crushed the life from Rhaegar Targaryen on the Trident. He’d done all the things that Jon would never do, and then when he was old, well past thirty, he’d taken a glancing blow from an axe and the wound had festered until the whole arm had to come off. Only then, crippled, had Donal Noye come to the Wall, when his life was all but over.
“他们才不是我弟兄，”琼恩驳斥，“他们恨我，因为我比他们优秀。”
“Yes, life,” Noye said. “A long life or a short one, it’s up to you, Snow. The road you’re walking, one of your brothers will slit your throat for you one night.”
“错了，他们恨的是你高高在上的优越感。他们眼中的你，是个城里来的、自以为是小少爷的杂种。”武器匠靠近来，“记住，你不是什么大人少爷，你姓的是雪诺，不是史塔克。而现在，你不但是私生子，还是个恶霸。”
“They’re not my brothers,” Jon snapped. “They hate me because I’m better than they are.”
“恶霸？”琼恩差点说不出话。这指控实在太不公平，气得他喘不过气来。“是他们四个先来找我麻烦。”
“No. They hate you because you act like you’re better than they are. They look at you and see a castle-bred bastard who thinks he’s a lordling.” The armorer leaned close. “You’re no lordling. Remember that. You’re a Snow, not a Stark. You’re a bastard and a bully.”
“他们四个人在场子里都被你羞辱过，说不定怕你怕得要死。我看过你练剑，跟你比划那不叫练习，要是你使的真剑，他们已经死上好几回了。你很清楚，我很清楚，他们也很清楚。你完全不留情面地羞辱他们，难道你觉得这样很值得骄傲？”
“A bully?” Jon almost choked on the word. The accusation was so unjust it took his breath away. “They were the ones who came after me. Four of them.”
琼恩迟疑了。他打赢的时候的确颇感骄傲，难道他不应该么？武器师傅连这么一点点喜悦也要剥夺，还让他觉得自己好像做错了什么。“他们年纪都比我大。”他防卫性地说。
“Four that you’ve humiliated in the yard. Four who are probably afraid of you. I’ve watched you fight. It’s not training with you. Put a good edge on your sword, and they’d be dead meat; you know it, I know it, they know it. You leave them nothing. You shame them. Does that make you proud?”
“他们是比你年长，也比你高壮。不过我敢打赌临冬城的教头一定教过你如何对付比自己高大的人。他是谁，某位老骑士？”
Jon hesitated. He did feel proud when he won. Why shouldn’t he? But the armorer was taking that away too, making it sound as if he were doing something wrong. “They’re all older than me,” he said defensively.
“是罗德利克·凯索爵士。”琼恩小心答道。他觉得对方话中有话。
“Older and bigger and stronger, that’s the truth. I’ll wager your master-at-arms taught you how to fight bigger men at Winterfell, though. Who was he, some old knight?”
唐纳·诺伊向前靠，几乎要贴上琼恩的脸。“小子，你想想罢，这儿的人在遇上艾里沙爵士以前没一个受过正式训练。他们的父亲是农民、车夫还有盗猎者，是铁匠、矿工或船上的桨手。他们的打架技巧是从甲板上、旧镇和兰尼斯港的暗巷里，或从国王大道路边的妓院、酒馆中学来的。他们或许相互耍耍棍子，但我跟你保证，里面没几个买得起真剑。”他一脸冷酷的表情，“所以雪诺大人，你倒是告诉我，打赢这些人真的很爽么？”
“Ser Rodrik Cassel,” Jon said warily. There was a trap here. He felt it closing around him.
“不要这样叫我！”琼恩激动地说。但他的怒意已没了力气，突然间只觉得惭愧和罪恶。“我不知道……我以为……”
Donal Noye leaned forward, into Jon’s face. “Now think on this, boy. None of these others have ever had a master-at-arms until Ser Alliser. Their fathers were farmers and wagonmen and poachers, smiths and miners and oars on a trading galley. What they know of fighting they learned between decks, in the alleys of Oldtown and Lannisport, in wayside brothels and taverns on the kingsroad. They may have clacked a few sticks together before they came here, but I promise you, not one in twenty was ever rich enough to own a real sword.” His look was grim. “So how do you like the taste of your victories now, Lord Snow?”
“好好想一想，”诺伊提醒他。“不然就准备枕着匕首睡觉。行了，你回去吧。”
“Don’t call me that!” Jon said sharply, but the force had gone out of his anger. Suddenly he felt ashamed and guilty. “I never … I didn’t think …”
琼恩离开武器库时，已近中午。太阳拨开云层，露出脸来。他转身背向阳光，将视线抬至长城，看着城墙在阳光下闪着晶莹的蓝光。虽然已经在此生活了好几个星期，可每当他目光触及这番景象，依旧不禁浑身颤抖。无数世代的风沙污泥，早在城墙留下印痕，宛如一层覆盖的膜，以至于城墙有时成了浅灰，犹如阴霾天际……但当晴日里天光直射，长城又仿佛有生命般闪闪发亮，如同一道横断半天的蓝白绝壁。
“Best you start thinking,” Noye warned him. “That, or sleep with a dagger by your bed. Now go.”
当初他们在国王大道上遥遥望见长城时，班扬·史塔克告诉琼恩这是人类所造最庞大的建筑物。“毫无疑问也是最没用的。”听完后，提利昂·兰尼斯特嘻笑着加上一句。然而随着距离渐渐拉近，连小恶魔也沉默下来。几里之外便可清楚地看到这条横亘北方地平线的灰蓝直线，毫不间断地向东西两边延展，直到消失于远方，好像在宣告：这里便是世界尽头。
By the time Jon left the armory, it was almost midday. The sun had broken through the clouds. He turned his back on it and lifted his eyes to the Wall, blazing blue and crystalline in the sunlight. Even after all these weeks, the sight of it still gave him the shivers. Centuries of windblown dirt had pocked and scoured it, covering it like a film, and it often seemed a pale grey, the color of an overcast sky … but when the sun caught it fair on a bright day, it shone , alive with light, a colossal blue-white cliff that filled up half the sky.
待他们终于见到黑城堡，却发现那不过是这面广大冰墙下的木造城楼和石砌高塔，看起来简直就像散布雪地的玩具积木。黑衫军的古老堡垒远不如临冬城，甚至称不上是座像样的城堡。它没有城墙，无法抵御来自东西南三方面的攻击，守夜人部队惟一关心的只有北方，而高耸在黑堡北边的正是绝境长城。长城高近七百尺，足足是它所庇护的要塞上最高的塔楼的三倍。叔叔说城墙之宽，足以让十二名全副武装的骑士并肩共骑。巨大的弩炮和怪兽般的投石机守卫着城墙，行走其上的黑衣军渺小如同蝼蚁。
The largest structure ever built by the hands of man, Benjen Stark had told Jon on the kingsroad when they had first caught sight of the Wall in the distance. “And beyond a doubt the most useless,” Tyrion Lannister had added with a grin, but even the Imp grew silent as they rode closer. You could see it from miles off, a pale blue line across the northern horizon, stretching away to the east and west and vanishing in the far distance, immense and unbroken. This is the end of the world , it seemed to say.
如今站在兵器库外向上看去，琼恩感受的震慑丝毫不亚于当日在国王大道上初见之时。绝境长城就是如此，有时你会忘记其存在，一如你对头顶长空和脚下大地司空见惯，不以为意，但有时又仿佛是举世间惟一真切的存在。它比七大王国还要古老，每当琼恩站在城墙下抬头仰望，总是头晕目眩。他可以感觉到雄浑繁厚的冰层向他重压而来，仿佛城墙崩塌要将他掩埋。琼恩隐约知道，倘若哪天长城真的陷落，整个世界必将随之瓦解。
When they finally spied Castle Black, its timbered keeps and stone towers looked like nothing more than a handful of toy blocks scattered on the snow, beneath the vast wall of ice. The ancient stronghold of the black brothers was no Winterfell, no true castle at all. Lacking walls, it could not be defended, not from the south, or east, or west; but it was only the north that concerned the Night’s Watch, and to the north loomed the Wall. Almost seven hundred feet high it stood, three times the height of the tallest tower in the stronghold it sheltered. His uncle said the top was wide enough for a dozen armored knights to ride abreast. The gaunt outlines of huge catapults and monstrous wooden cranes stood sentry up there, like the skeletons of great birds, and among them walked men in black as small as ants.
“墙外是什么，真叫人猜不透，对吧？”一个熟悉的声音道。
As he stood outside the armory looking up, Jon felt almost as overwhelmed as he had that day on the kingsroad, when he’d seen it for the first time. The Wall was like that. Sometimes he could almost forget that it was there, the way you forgot about the sky or the earth underfoot, but there were other times when it seemed as if there was nothing else in the world. It was older than the Seven Kingdoms, and when he stood beneath it and looked up, it made Jon dizzy. He could feel the great weight of all that ice pressing down on him, as if it were about to topple, and somehow Jon knew that if it fell, the world fell with it.
琼恩转过头。“兰尼斯特。我没看到——我的意思是说，我以为这儿只有我一个人。”
“Makes you wonder what lies beyond,” a familiar voice said.
提利昂·兰尼斯特全身裹满毛皮，活像只小熊。“乘人不备好处多多，你永远也不知道会学到些什么。”
Jon looked around. “Lannister. I didn’t see—I mean, I thought I was alone.”
“从我这儿你能学到什么？”琼恩告诉他。自他们的旅途结束之后，他便很少看到这侏儒。提利昂·兰尼斯特既是王后的弟弟，自然受到贵客般的款待。莫尔蒙总司令让他住在国王塔——说得好听，其实已有一百年没国王住过了——和他同桌用餐。兰尼斯特白天在长城上骑马，晚上则与艾里沙爵士、波文·马尔锡和其他高阶官员饮酒赌博。
Tyrion Lannister was bundled in furs so thickly he looked like a very small bear. “There’s much to be said for taking people unawares. You never know what you might learn.”
“唉，我走到哪儿学到哪儿。”这矮子用一根粗糙的黑拐杖指着长城，“我常说……怎么前人千辛万苦才把城墙盖好，后人立刻便想知道墙的另一面有什么？”他歪着头，用那双大小不一的古怪眼睛看着琼恩。“你也不例外，对不？”
“You won’t learn anything from me,” Jon told him. He had seen little of the dwarf since their journey ended. As the queen’s own brother, Tyrion Lannister had been an honored guest of the Night’s Watch. The Lord Commander had given him rooms in the King’s Tower—so-called, though no king had visited it for a hundred years—and Lannister dined at Mormont’s own table and spent his days riding the Wall and his nights dicing and drinking with Ser Alliser and Bowen Marsh and the other high officers.
“我看没什么特别。”琼恩道。他好想跟随班扬·史塔克一同出外巡猎，深入鬼影森林，好想与曼斯·雷德的野人交锋，守护王国免于异鬼侵袭，但自己心里想要什么，还是别说出来的好。“游骑兵说墙外不过就是树林、山脉和结冻的湖泊，一片冰天雪地。”
“Oh, I learn things everywhere I go.” The little man gestured up at the Wall with a gnarled black walking stick. “As I was saying … why is it that when one man builds a wall, the next man immediately needs to know what’s on the other side?” He cocked his head and looked at Jon with his curious mismatched eyes. “You do want to know what’s on the other side, don’t you?”
“还有害人的古灵精怪呐，”提利昂说，“可别忘了，雪诺大人。否则大伙儿干嘛这么大动干戈？”
“It’s nothing special,” Jon said. He wanted to ride with Benjen Stark on his rangings, deep into the mysteries of the haunted forest, wanted to fight Mance Rayder’s wildlings and ward the realm against the Others, but it was better not to speak of the things you wanted. “The rangers say it’s just woods and mountains and frozen lakes, with lots of snow and ice.”
“不要叫我雪诺大人。”
“And the grumkins and the snarks,” Tyrion said. “Let us not forget them, Lord Snow, or else what’s that big thing for?”
侏儒扬扬眉毛。“难道我喜欢被人叫小恶魔？一旦别人发现绰号对你的杀伤力，这绰号就跟定你啦。既然他们爱给你起绰号，你就大大方方地接受，最好还装出乐在其中的样子，那他们就再也伤不了你了。”他举起拐杖指指前方。“哪，跟我走走。他们这会儿应该在大厅里弄那难吃的汤了，我正想喝点热的。”
“Don’t call me Lord Snow.”
琼恩也饿了，所以他走在兰尼斯特身边，刻意放慢脚步以配合侏儒笨拙而古怪的姿势。风势渐大，他们可以听见周围木屋嘎吱作响。远处，一道被遗忘的厚重窗户反复噼砰。一堆雪从屋顶滑下，落在他们身边，发出低沉的撞击。
The dwarf lifted an eyebrow. “Would you rather be called the Imp? Let them see that their words can cut you, and you’ll never be free of the mockery. If they want to give you a name, take it, make it your own. Then they can’t hurt you with it anymore.” He gestured with his stick. “Come, walk with me. They’ll be serving some vile stew in the common hall by now, and I could do with a bowl of something hot.”
“没见你的狼呢。”兰尼斯特边走边说。
Jon was hungry too, so he fell in beside Lannister and slowed his pace to match the dwarf’s awkward, waddling steps. The wind was rising, and they could hear the old wooden buildings creaking around them, and in the distance a heavy shutter banging, over and over, forgotten. Once there was a muffled thump as a blanket of snow slid from a roof and landed near them.
“训练的时候，我把它拴在旧马房那边。他们现在把马都关在东边的马厩，所以不会碍着他。其他时候他都跟着我，我睡在哈丁塔。”
“I don’t see your wolf,” Lannister said as they walked.
“就那座连城垛都塌掉的塔，是吗？那塔下面的广场都是碎石头，整个还歪歪斜斜，跟咱们高贵的劳勃国王酒醉后一个德行。我以为那些塔早就废弃不用了。”
“I chain him up in the old stables when we’re training. They board all the horses in the east stables now, so no one bothers him. The rest of the time he stays with me. My sleeping cell is in Hardin’s Tower.”
琼恩耸耸肩道，“反正没人管你睡哪儿。这些古堡几乎都荒废了，爱睡哪里随便你。”黑城堡曾经拥有多达五千名全副武装、鞍马齐备、仆从如云的战士。如今却只剩十分之一的数量，建筑也纷纷沦为荒颓废墟。
“That’s the one with the broken battlement, no? Shattered stone in the yard below, and a lean to it like our noble king Robert after a long night’s drinking? I thought all those buildings had been abandoned.”
提利昂·兰尼斯特的笑在冷空气里蒸腾。“那我就请你老爸务必在你那座塔垮塌之前，多抓几个石匠过来。”
Jon shrugged. “No one cares where you sleep. Most of the old keeps are empty, you can pick any cell you want.” Once Castle Black had housed five thousand fighting men with all their horses and servants and weapons. Now it was home to a tenth that number, and parts of it were falling into ruin.
琼恩听得出话中的嘲弄意味，却无法否认那是事实。守夜人一共沿长城建了十九座雄伟要塞，如今只剩三座仍有部队驻守：高耸的东海望在强风吹拂的灰暗海滨，影子塔坚毅地伫立于长城边陲的群山之中，黑城堡则位于两者之间，地处国王大道尽头。其他堡垒早已被人遗忘，现在都成了孤独的鬼城，冷风飕飕吹过黑窗，死者幽灵游荡其中。
Tyrion Lannister’s laughter steamed in the cold air. “I’ll be sure to tell your father to arrest more stonemasons, before your tower collapses.”
“我一个人住比较好，”琼恩固执地说，“其他人很怕白灵。”
Jon could taste the mockery there, but there was no denying the truth. The Watch had built nineteen great strongholds along the Wall, but only three were still occupied: Eastwatch on its grey windswept shore, the Shadow Tower hard by the mountains where the Wall ended, and Castle Black between them, at the end of the kingsroad. The other keeps, long deserted, were lonely, haunted places, where cold winds whistled through black windows and the spirits of the dead manned the parapets.
“他们倒聪明。”兰尼斯特说。他随即转变话题，“最近大家都在议论你叔叔，他是不是出去太久了？”
“It’s better that I’m by myself,” Jon said stubbornly. “The rest of them are scared of Ghost.”
琼恩忆起自己失望之下的幻想，那幅班扬·史塔克倒卧雪地的景象，立刻撇过头去。侏儒很擅察言观色，他可不想让他瞧见自己眼中的罪恶。“他说会赶在我命名日前回来。”他坦承。他的命名日早在两周前便已悄无声息地来了又去。“他们是去找威玛·罗伊斯爵士，此人的父亲是艾林公爵的封臣。班扬叔叔说他们会一直搜索到影子塔，一路深入群山。”
“Wise boys,” Lannister said. Then he changed the subject. “The talk is, your uncle is too long away.”
“听说近来有不少游骑兵好手失踪。”他们一边登上大厅的阶梯，兰尼斯特一边说，他嘻嘻笑着打开门。“也许古灵精怪今年特别饿罢。”
Jon remembered the wish he’d wished in his anger, the vision of Benjen Stark dead in the snow, and he looked away quickly. The dwarf had a way of sensing things, and Jon did not want him to see the guilt in his eyes. “He said he’d be back by my name day,” he admitted. His name day had come and gone, unremarked, a fortnight past. “They were looking for Ser Waymar Royce, his father is bannerman to Lord Arryn. Uncle Benjen said they might search as far as the Shadow Tower. That’s all the way up in the mountains.”
进入厅堂，虽然炉火熊熊，仍旧感觉地方宽敞，寒气逼人。乌鸦栖息于高敞的木天花板上，在众人头顶嘎嘎叫着。琼恩从厨子手中接过一碗肉汤和大块黑面包。葛兰、癞哈蟆和其他几人坐在最靠近火炉的长凳上，彼此粗声笑闹咒骂。琼恩若有所思地看了他们一会，然后在大厅的角落挑了个位子坐下，远远离开其他人。
“I hear that a good many rangers have vanished of late,” Lannister said as they mounted the steps to the common hall. He grinned and pulled open the door. “Perhaps the grumkins are hungry this year.”
提利昂·兰尼斯特坐在他对面，一脸狐疑地嗅着浓汤。“大麦、洋葱、胡萝卜，”他喃喃念道，“这些煮饭的到底知不知道芜箐不能当肉啊？”
Inside, the hall was immense and drafty, even with a fire roaring in its great hearth. Crows nested in the timbers of its lofty ceiling. Jon heard their cries overhead as he accepted a bowl of stew and a heel of black bread from the day’s cooks. Grenn and Toad and some of the others were seated at the bench nearest the warmth, laughing and cursing each other in rough voices. Jon eyed them thoughtfully for a moment. Then he chose a spot at the far end of the hall, well away from the other diners.
“这是羊肉浓汤耶。”琼恩脱下手套，探手到汤碗溢出的热气里取暖。闻到肉香他口水都流了下来。
Tyrion Lannister sat across from him, sniffing at the stew suspiciously. “Barley, onion, carrot,” he muttered. “Someone should tell the cooks that turnip isn’t a meat.”
“雪诺。”
“It’s mutton stew.” Jon pulled off his gloves and warmed his hands in the steam rising from the bowl. The smell made his mouth water.
琼恩认得艾里沙·索恩的声音，但这回话中却有种他从前没听过的语气，他转过头。
“Snow.”
“司令大人要见你。现在就去。”
Jon knew Alliser Thorne’s voice, but there was a curious note in it that he had not heard before. He turned.
一时之间琼恩吓得不敢动弹。为什么总司令要见他？难道他们有了班扬的消息，他胡乱揣测，一定是他死了，他的想像果然成真。“是我叔叔的事吗？”他冲口而问，“他平安回来了吗？”
“The Lord Commander wants to see you. Now.”
“司令大人平素可不习惯等人。”艾里沙这么回答，“而我更不习惯下了命令还要听野种问东问西。”
For a moment Jon was too frightened to move. Why would the Lord Commander want to see him? They had heard something about Benjen, he thought wildly, he was dead, the vision had come true. “Is it my uncle?” he blurted. “Is he returned safe?”
提利昂·兰尼斯特霍地跳下长凳，站起身道：“够了，索恩，你吓着他了。”
“The Lord Commander is not accustomed to waiting,” was Ser Alliser’s reply. “And I am not accustomed to having my commands questioned by bastards.”
“兰尼斯特，你少管闲事，你没资格在这儿说话。”
Tyrion Lannister swung off the bench and rose. “Stop it, Thorne. You’re frightening the boy.”
“在朝廷里就不一样喽。”侏儒微笑，“我只消几句，你下半辈子就准备当个孤苦老人，别想再训练小毛头了。快告诉雪诺熊老找他干嘛，到底是不是他叔叔的事？”
“Keep out of matters that don’t concern you, Lannister. You have no place here.”
“不是。”艾里沙道，“完全两码子事。今天早上有信鸦从临冬城飞来，带来他弟弟的消息。”他更正道，“应该说是他同父异母的弟弟。”
“I have a place at court, though,” the dwarf said, smiling. “A word in the right ear, and you’ll die a sour old man before you get another boy to train. Now tell Snow why the Old Bear needs to see him. Is there news of his uncle?”
“布兰，”琼恩倒抽一口气，挣扎着起来。“布兰出事了。”
“No,” Ser Alliser said. “This is another matter entirely. A bird arrived this morning from Winterfell, with a message that concerns his brother.” He corrected himself. “His half brother.”
提利昂·兰尼斯特伸手搁在他臂膀上。“琼恩，”他说，“我真的很遗憾。”
“Bran,” Jon breathed, scrambling to his feet. “Something’s happened to Bran.”
琼恩几乎没听到他的话。他拨开提利昂的手，大跨步穿过厅堂，到门边时跑了起来。他一路冲过积雪，狂奔至司令官堡垒。守卫让他通过，他三步并作两步奔上塔顶。等冲到总司令官面前，琼恩已经满身大汗，喘不过气来。“布兰，”他说，“信上说布兰怎样了？”
Tyrion Lannister laid a hand on his arm. “Jon,” he said. “I am truly sorry.”
守夜人军团总司令杰奥·莫尔蒙是个坏脾气的老人，一把灰胡子，顶着个大光头。他正拿玉米粒喂食停在手上的乌鸦。“我听说你识字。”他把乌鸦挥开，它拍着翅膀飞到窗边，然后蹲坐下来看着莫尔蒙从腰际抽出一张卷好的纸交给琼恩。“玉米，”它刺耳地叫道，“玉米，玉米。”
Jon scarcely heard him. He brushed off Tyrion’s hand and strode across the hall. He was running by the time he hit the doors. He raced to the Commander’s Keep, dashing through drifts of old snow. When the guards passed him, he took the tower steps two at a time. By the time he burst into the presence of the Lord Commander, his boots were soaked and Jon was wild-eyed and panting. “Bran,” he said. “What does it say about Bran?”
琼恩的手指在已拆封的白蜡印记上摸索，顺着冰原狼的轮廓。他认出这是罗柏的字迹，但随着阅读，信本身却模糊旋转起来，他方才明白自己在哭。透过泪水，他拼凑出信上的意思，抬起头。“他醒了。”他说，“诸神让他活过来了。”
Jeor Mormont, Lord Commander of the Night’s Watch, was a gruff old man with an immense bald head and a shaggy grey beard. He had a raven on his arm, and he was feeding it kernels of corn. “I am told you can read.” He shook the raven off, and it flapped its wings and flew to the window, where it sat watching as Mormont drew a roll of paper from his belt and handed it to Jon. “Corn,” it muttered in a raucous voice. “Corn, corn.”
“但也残废了。”莫尔蒙道，“小子，我很遗憾。把信读完罢。”
Jon’s finger traced the outline of the direwolf in the white wax of the broken seal. He recognized Robb’s hand, but the letters seemed to blur and run as he tried to read them. He realized he was crying. And then, through the tears, he found the sense in the words, and raised his head. “He woke up,” he said. “The gods gave him back.”
他把视线移回信上，但上面写什么已经不重要了。什么都不重要了。布兰活了下来。“我弟弟活下来了！”他告诉莫尔蒙。总司令摇摇头，拾起一把玉米，吹声口哨。乌鸦立即飞上他肩头，叫道：“活了！活了！”
“Crippled,” Mormont said. “I’m sorry, boy. Read the rest of the letter.”
琼恩满脸笑容，手中握着罗柏的信奔下楼梯。“我弟弟活下来了！”他告诉守卫。他们互看一眼。他跑回厅堂，发现提利昂·兰尼斯特刚吃完东西。他一把抓住小个子的腋下，将他抱到半空转圈。“布兰活下来了！”他喊。兰尼斯特一脸惊讶的表情。琼恩放下他，把信塞到他手中。“这里，你自己读。”
He looked at the words, but they didn’t matter. Nothing mattered. Bran was going to live. “My brother is going to live,” he told Mormont. The Lord Commander shook his head, gathered up a fistful of corn, and whistled. The raven flew to his shoulder, crying, “Live! Live!”
其他人聚集过来，好奇地看着他。琼恩看到葛兰站在几尺之外，一只手上绑着厚厚的羊毛绷带。他看起来既焦虑又不安，一点都不凶恶。于是琼恩朝他走去，葛兰见状立即后退，同时举手说：“小杂种，你离我远点。”
Jon ran down the stairs, a smile on his face and Robb’s letter in his hand. “My brother is going to live,” he told the guards. They exchanged a look. He ran back to the common hall, where he found Tyrion Lannister just finishing his meal. He grabbed the little man under the arms, hoisted him up in the air, and spun him around in a circle. “Bran is going to live!” he whooped. Lannister looked startled. Jon put him down and thrust the paper into his hands. “Here, read it,” he said.
琼恩微笑道：“把你手腕弄成这样，我很抱歉。以前罗柏也用同样的招式对付我，虽然用的是木剑，可七层地狱，真他妈的痛。我想你的伤势一定更严重。这样罢，如果你愿意，改天我来教你如何克制这招。”
Others were gathering around and looking at him curiously. Jon noticed Grenn a few feet away. A thick woolen bandage was wrapped around one hand. He looked anxious and uncomfortable, not menacing at all. Jon went to him. Grenn edged backward and put up his hands. “Stay away from me now, you bastard.”
艾里沙·索恩爵士听到了这句话。“哟，雪诺大人这下想抢我的位子啦。”他冷笑道，“我看教狼变魔术都比教这些笨牛容易。”
Jon smiled at him. “I’m sorry about your wrist. Robb used the same move on me once, only with a wooden blade. It hurt like seven hells, but yours must be worse. Look, if you want, I can show you how to defend that.”
“艾里沙爵士，我就跟你赌。”琼恩说，“我倒是很想看白灵变魔术。”
Alliser Thorne overheard him. “Lord Snow wants to take my place now.” He sneered. “I’d have an easier time teaching a wolf to juggle than you will training this aurochs.”
琼恩听见葛兰吓得倒抽一口冷气。四周一片死寂。
“I’ll take that wager, Ser Alliser,” Jon said. “I’d love to see Ghost juggle.”
接着提利昂·兰尼斯特捧腹大笑起来。邻近餐桌上三名黑衣弟兄也跟着笑。笑声快速散播，连厨师们也忍不住加入。梁木上的鸟群被笑声惊动，最后连葛兰也咯咯笑了起来。
Jon heard Grenn suck in his breath, shocked. Silence fell.
只有艾里沙爵士从头至尾没有将视线从琼恩身上移开。待笑声渐止，他一脸阴沉，右手握拳。“雪诺大人，你犯了一个很严重的错误，”最后，他用对仇人的口吻说。
Then Tyrion Lannister guffawed. Three of the black brothers joined in from a nearby table. The laughter spread up and down the benches, until even the cooks joined in. The birds stirred in the rafters, and finally even Grenn began to chuckle.
第二十一章 艾德
Ser Alliser never took his eyes from Jon. As the laughter rolled around him, his face darkened, and his sword hand curled into a fist. “That was a grievous error, Lord Snow,” he said at last in the acid tones of an enemy.
艾德·史塔克浑身酸痛，又累又饿，心情恶劣地骑马穿过红堡高耸的青铜大门。御前总管前来通知他派席尔大学士召开紧急的御前会议，希望新任首相方便的话能大驾光临时，他人还在马背上，心里只想好好泡个热水澡，来只烤鸡或烤鸭，然后在羽毛床上睡个觉。“方便的话，改成明天。”奈德下马时没好气地说。
*EDDARD
总管恭敬地一躬到底。“首相大人，那我就转告重臣们，您不便出席。”
E ddard Stark rode through the towering bronze doors of the Red Keep sore, tired, hungry, and irritable. He was still ahorse, dreaming of a long hot soak, a roast fowl, and a featherbed, when the king’s steward told him that Grand Maester Pycelle had convened an urgent meeting of the small council. The honor of the Hand’s presence was requested as soon as it was convenient. “It will be convenient on the morrow,” Ned snapped as he dismounted.
“算了，该死的。”奈德道。还没上任便先把朝廷重臣给全得罪光那怎么成。“我这就去见他们。但请先给我几分钟，容我换上比较正式的服装。”
The steward bowed very low. “I shall give the councillors your regrets, my lord.”
“是的，大人。”总管说，“我们已经把艾林大人以前在首相塔的房间都给您准备好了，如您愿意，我这就差人把您的东西给送过去。”
“No, damn it,” Ned said. It would not do to offend the council before he had even begun. “I will see them. Pray give me a few moments to change into something more presentable.”
“有劳了。”奈德边说边扯下骑马戴的手套，塞进腰带。身后，他的家人和臣属正陆续进入大门。奈德看到管家维扬·普尔，便叫住他，“看来宫里好像有急事找我。好好安顿我女儿，告诉乔里叫她们待在房里。不准艾莉亚到处乱跑。”普尔欠身。奈德转身对御前总管说：“我的马车还在城里半路上。我需要合适的衣服。”
“Yes, my lord,” the steward said. “We have given you Lord Arryn’s former chambers in the Tower of the Hand, if it please you. I shall have your things taken there.”
“为您服务是我莫大的荣幸。”总管道。
“My thanks,” Ned said as he ripped off his riding gloves and tucked them into his belt. The rest of his household was coming through the gate behind him. Ned saw Vayon Poole, his own steward, and called out. “It seems the council has urgent need of me. See that my daughters find their bedchambers, and tell Jory to keep them there. Arya is not to go exploring,” Poole bowed. Ned turned back to the royal steward. “My wagons are still straggling through the city. I shall need appropriate garments.”
于是，筋疲力尽的奈德，就这么穿着借来的衣服，大步走进议事厅，发现四名重臣正在等他。
“It will be my great pleasure,” the steward said.
议事厅的陈设极为华丽。地板上铺的是密尔地毯，而非灯芯草席。房间一角摆着一幅来自盛夏群岛的木屏风，上面雕刻有上百种栩栩如生、色彩斑斓的珍禽异兽。墙壁上则挂满了诺佛斯、科霍尔和里斯产的精美织锦。门两侧是一对瓦雷利亚的狮身人面兽雕像，圆润的红榴石双眼在黑色大理石的脸上显得炯炯有神。
And so Ned had come striding into the council chambers, bone-tired and dressed in borrowed clothing, to find four members of the small council waiting for him.
奈德前脚刚踏进房间，几位重臣中他最嫌恶的太监瓦里斯便靠了过来。“史塔克大人，我听说了您在国王大道上遇到的麻烦事儿，真令人遗憾哪。我们都去圣堂为乔佛里王子点了蜡烛，祈祷他早日康复。”他的手在奈德袖子上留下脂粉的痕迹。他浑身散发出腐败的甜腻气息，闻起来活像生在坟墓上的花。
The chamber was richly furnished. Myrish carpets covered the floor instead of rushes, and in one corner a hundred fabulous beasts cavorted in bright paints on a carved screen from the Summer Isles. The walls were hung with tapestries from Norvos and Qohor and Lys, and a pair of Valyrian sphinxes flanked the door, eyes of polished garnet smoldering in black marble faces.
“你的神想必听到了你的祷告，”奈德冷淡而有礼地回答，“王子的健康状况已日渐好转。”他从太监掌中抽出手，穿过房间朝蓝礼公爵走去。蓝礼正站在屏风旁，小声地和一名矮个男子交谈，那人必是小指头无疑。劳勃刚夺下王位时，蓝礼不过是个七岁小男生，如今他已长大成人，神貌酷似乃兄，奈德为此觉得极不自在。每次见到他，都仿佛时光倒流，看到那个英气勃发，甫从三叉戟河得胜归来的劳勃站在面前。
The councillor Ned liked least, the eunuch Varys, accosted him the moment he entered. “Lord Stark, I was grievous sad to hear about your troubles on the kingsroad. We have all been visiting the sept to light candles for Prince Joffrey. I pray for his recovery.” His hand left powder stains on Ned’s sleeve, and he smelled as foul and sweet as flowers on a grave.
“史塔克大人，看来您安然抵达了。”蓝礼道。
“Your gods have heard you,” Ned replied, cool yet polite. “The prince grows stronger every day.” He disentangled himself from the eunuch’s grip and crossed the room to where Lord Renly stood by the screen, talking quietly with a short man who could only be Littlefinger. Renly had been a boy of eight when Robert won the throne, but he had grown into a man so like his brother that Ned found it disconcerting. Whenever he saw him, it was as if the years had slipped away and Robert stood before him, fresh from his victory on the Trident.
“您不也是。”奈德回答，“恕我直言，有时候您和您哥哥劳勃真像一个模子打出来的。”
“I see you have arrived safely, Lord Stark,” Renly said.
“我哪比得上他。”蓝礼耸耸肩。
“And you as well,” Ned replied. “You must forgive me, but sometimes you look the very image of your brother Robert.”
“您至少穿得比他好。”小指头俏皮地说，“蓝礼大人花在衣服上的钱，宫里的夫人太太恐怕都没几个比得上。”
“A poor copy,” Renly said with a shrug.
此话倒是不假。蓝礼公爵穿着暗绿天鹅绒紧身衣，上面绣了十二头金色雄鹿。一边肩头潇洒地垂着织金半披风，用一枚翡翠胸针别起。“这应该算不上滔天大罪。”蓝礼笑道，“瞧瞧你穿的什么德行，那才失礼。”
“Though much better dressed,” Littlefinger quipped. “Lord Renly spends more on clothing than half the ladies of the court.”
小指头不理会他的嘲笑。他嘴角挂着近乎轻慢的微笑看着奈德。“史塔克大人，这些年来我一直想见见您。我想凯特琳夫人应该向您提起过我吧？”
It was true enough. Lord Renly was in dark green velvet, with a dozen golden stags embroidered on his doublet. A cloth-of-gold half cape was draped casually across one shoulder, fastened with an emerald brooch. “There are worse crimes,” Renly said with a laugh. “The way you dress, for one.”
“她是提过。”奈德冷冷地答道。对方这句傲慢中带着促狭的话惹恼了他。“如果我没记错的话，你也认识我哥哥布兰登。”
Littlefinger ignored the jibe. He eyed Ned with a smile on his lips that bordered on insolence. “I have hoped to meet you for some years, Lord Stark. No doubt Lady Catelyn has mentioned me to you.”
蓝礼·拜拉席恩哈哈大笑。瓦里斯则曳步凑来。
“She has,” Ned replied with a chill in his voice. The sly arrogance of the comment rankled him. “I understand you knew my brother Brandon as well.”
“我跟他很熟。”小指头道，“至今身上都还留着他的纪念。布兰登也提起过我？”
Renly Baratheon laughed. Varys shuffled over to listen.
“常提起你，多半是火冒三丈的时候。”奈德说，心中希望就此结束这个话题。他对这类文字游戏素无兴趣。
“Rather too well,” Littlefinger said. “I still carry a token of his esteem. Did Brandon speak of me too?”
“我还以为你们史塔克家的人没那么大火气，”小指头说，“在我们南方，大家都说你们是冰做的，一过颈泽便要融化。”
“Often, and with some heat,” Ned said, hoping that would end it. He had no patience with this game they played, this dueling with words.
“贝里席大人，您大可放心，我并不打算太快融化。”奈德朝会议桌移去。“派席尔师傅，我瞧您身体还很硬朗。”
“I should have thought that heat ill suits you Starks,” Littlefinger said. “Here in the south, they say you are all made of ice, and melt when you ride below the Neck.”
大学士从他长桌尾端的长椅上抬头，露出微笑。“大人，以我这把年纪，有这样的身体很不错了。”他答道，“啊，只是容易疲劳。”他有张慈蔼的脸，几束白发垂挂在早已秃光的额头两边。他的学士项圈并非鲁温那种简单的金属制品，而是由二十四种金属片所串成的沉重项链，从喉头一直垂到胸膛。锁链用人类所知的每一种金属打造而成：黑铁和红金，发亮红铜和沉重的铅，精钢、锡和黯淡的白银，黄铜、青铜与白金。石榴石、紫水晶和黑珍珠装饰着金属链，翡翠和红宝石点缀其间。“我们不妨开始罢。”大学士把手放在大肚子上反复揉搓，“再等下去，只怕我就要睡着了。”
“I do not plan on melting soon, Lord Baelish. You may count on it.” Ned moved to the council table and said, “Maester Pycelle, I trust you are well.”
“如您所愿，”国王在会议桌的首位空着，那椅子靠背上用金线绣着拜拉席恩家族的宝冠雄鹿。奈德拣了国王右边，象征国王右手的位子坐下。“诸位大人，”他正色道，“很抱歉让大家久等。”
The Grand Maester smiled gently from his tall chair at the foot of the table. “Well enough for a man of my years, my lord,” he replied, “yet I do tire easily, I fear.” Wispy strands of white hair fringed the broad bald dome of his forehead above a kindly face. His maester’s collar was no simple metal choker such as Luwin wore, but two dozen heavy chains wound together into a ponderous metal necklace that covered him from throat to breast. The links were forged of every metal known to man: black iron and red gold, bright copper and dull lead, steel and tin and pale silver, brass and bronze and platinum. Garnets and amethysts and black pearls adorned the metal-work, and here and there an emerald or ruby. “Perhaps we might begin soon,” the Grand Maester said, hands knitting together atop his broad stomach. “I fear I shall fall asleep if we wait much longer.”
“史塔克大人，您是国王的首相，”瓦里斯道，“为您效劳就是我们职责所在。”
“As you will.” The king’s seat sat empty at the head of the table, the crowned stag of Baratheon embroidered in gold thread on its pillows. Ned took the chair beside it, as the right hand of his king. “My lords,” he said formally, “I am sorry to have kept you waiting.”
眼看其他人纷纷在自己固有的座位落坐，艾德·史塔克才猛然惊觉此时此地自己是多么格格不入。他忆起劳勃在临冬城墓窖里对他说过的话，我身边净是些白痴和马屁精。奈德朝会议桌看去，暗自揣测哪些是白痴，哪些又是马屁精。答案他已了然于心。“我们只有五人。”他指出。
“You are the King’s Hand,” Varys said. “We serve at your pleasure, Lord Stark.”
“国王北行之后没多久，史坦尼斯大人便回了龙石岛。”瓦里斯道，“至于我们英勇的巴利斯坦爵士，此刻无疑正随侍国王身边，护送他穿过城市罢。身为御林铁卫队长，这是他职责所在呢。”
As the others took their accustomed seats, it struck Eddard Stark forcefully that he did not belong here, in this room, with these men. He remembered what Robert had told him in the crypts below Winterfell. I am surrounded by flatterers and fools , the king had insisted. Ned looked down the council table and wondered which were the flatterers and which the fools. He thought he knew already. “We are but five,” he pointed out.
“或许我们该等巴利斯坦爵士和陛下加入之后再开始。”奈德提议。
“Lord Stannis took himself to Dragonstone not long after the king went north,” Varys said, “and our gallant Ser Barristan no doubt rides beside the king as he makes his way through the city, as befits the Lord Commander of the Kingsguard.”
蓝礼·拜拉席恩朗声笑道：“要等我老哥赏脸，那不知到何年何月啰。”
“Perhaps we had best wait for Ser Barristan and the king to join us,” Ned suggested.
“我们亲爱的劳勃国王有太多事情需要操心，”瓦里斯说，“所以便将鸡毛蒜皮小事交给我们，以减轻负担。”
Renly Baratheon laughed aloud. “If we wait for my brother to grace us with his royal presence, it could be a long sit.”
“瓦里斯大人的意思是说，凡是牵涉财政、农获和律法的事务，我王兄听了就头痛。”蓝礼公爵道，“所以管理国家就落到我们头上了。他倒是不忘记时不时交代些什么下来。”他从袖子里抽出一张裹紧的纸放在桌上。“比如今天早上，他吩咐我提前全速进城，请派席尔大学士立刻召开这次会议。他有项紧急差事交给我们办。”
“Our good King Robert has many cares,” Varys said. “He entrusts some small matters to us, to lighten his load.”
小指头微笑着将信笺交给奈德，上面盖了王家印信。奈德用拇指揭开蜡印，摊平信纸，想看看国王的紧急命令究竟是什么。他越读越难以置信，劳勃到底要胡闹到什么地步才罢休？还是以他的名义，这简直是雪上加霜。“天杀的，”他不禁咒道。
“What Lord Varys means is that all this business of coin and crops and justice bores my royal brother to tears,” Lord Renly said, “so it falls to us to govern the realm. He does send us a command from time to time.” He drew a tightly rolled paper from his sleeve and laid it on the table. “This morning he commanded me to ride ahead with all haste and ask Grand Maester Pycelle to convene this council at once. He has an urgent task for us.”
“奈德大人的意思是说，”蓝礼公爵宣布，“国王陛下指示我们举办一次盛大的比武竞技，以庆祝新首相上任。”
Littlefinger smiled and handed the paper to Ned. It bore the royal seal. Ned broke the wax with his thumb and flattened the letter to consider the king’s urgent command, reading the words with mounting disbelief. Was there no end to Robert’s folly? And to do this in his name, that was salt in the wound. “Gods be good,” he swore.
“要花多少钱？”小指头兴趣索然地问。
“What Lord Eddard means to say,” Lord Renly announced, “is that His Grace instructs us to stage a great tournament in honor of his appointment as the Hand of the King.”
奈德从信上念出答案：“优胜者赏四万金龙币，居次者赏两万金龙币。团体近身战的优胜者也是两万，射箭优胜则是一万。”
“How much?” asked Littlefinger, mildly.
“一共九万金币。”小指头叹道，“还得加上其他开销。想也知道劳勃一定要大宴宾客。也就是说我们需要厨师、木匠、女侍、歌手、戏子伶人和杂耍傻子……”
Ned read the answer off the letter. “Forty thousand golden dragons to the champion. Twenty thousand to the man who comes second, another twenty to the winner of the melee, and ten thousand to the victor of the archery competition.”
“傻子我们倒是不愁找到。”蓝礼公爵说。
“Ninety thousand gold pieces,” Littlefinger sighed. “And we must not neglect the other costs. Robert will want a prodigious feast. That means cooks, carpenters, serving girls, singers, jugglers, fools …”
派席尔总师看着小指头问：“国库付得出这笔款子？”
“Fools we have in plenty,” Lord Renly said.
“哪来的国库？”小指头撇撇嘴，“大学士您就别装蒜了，你我都很清楚国库已经空了好多年。还不是得伸手借钱，想必兰尼斯特家会很乐意支援。反正咱们已经欠了泰温大人三百多万金龙，再借个几十万算什么？”
Grand Maester Pycelle looked to Littlefinger and asked, “Will the treasury bear the expense?”
奈德震惊无比。“你说王室负债高达‘三百万’金币？”
“What treasury is that?” Littlefinger replied with a twist of his mouth. “Spare me the foolishness, Maester. You know as well as I that the treasury has been empty for years. I shall have to borrow the money. No doubt the Lannisters will be accommodating. We owe Lord Tywin some three million dragons at present, what matter another hundred thousand?”
“史塔克大人，此刻王室负债总额超过六百万。兰尼斯特家是最大的债主，但我们也向提利尔大人、布拉佛斯的铁金库，还有好些泰洛西商行借过款。最近我不得不另辟财源，把主意动到了教会头上，总主教大人讨价还价的本领之高，连多恩的鱼贩都比不上。”
Ned was stunned. “Are you claiming that the Crown is three million gold pieces in debt?”
奈德简直错愕到无以复加。“伊里斯·坦格利安留下了堆积如山的金银财宝，你怎么会让它沦落到这步田地？”
“The Crown is more than six million gold pieces in debt, Lord Stark. The Lannisters are the biggest part of it, but we have also borrowed from Lord Tyrell, the Iron Bank of Braavos, and several Tyroshi trading cartels. Of late I’ve had to turn to the Faith. The High Septon haggles worse than a Dornish fishmonger.”
小指头耸肩：“财政大臣只管找钱，花钱的是国王和首相。”
Ned was aghast. “Aerys Targaryen left a treasury flowing with gold. How could you let this happen?”
“琼恩·艾林绝不会允许劳勃这样挥霍。”奈德忿忿地说。
Littlefinger gave a shrug. “The master of coin finds the money. The king and the Hand spend it.”
派席尔总师摇摇他那颗光头，项链轻声作响。“艾林大人固然精打细算，但恐怕国王陛下不见得都听从睿智的谏言。”
“I will not believe that Jon Arryn allowed Robert to beggar the realm,” Ned said hotly.
“我王兄热爱比武竞技和山珍海味，”蓝礼·拜拉席恩道，“他最讨厌所谓的‘数铜板’。”
Grand Maester Pycelle shook his great bald head, his chains clinking softly. “Lord Arryn was a prudent man, but I fear that His Grace does not always listen to wise counsel.”
“我会跟陛下谈谈，”奈德说，“这么铺张浪费的比赛，国家可负担不起。”
“My royal brother loves tournaments and feasts,” Renly Baratheon said, “and he loathes what he calls ‘counting coppers.’”
“跟他谈谈当然很好，”蓝礼公爵道，“不过我们还是先着手订个计划吧。”
“I will speak with His Grace,” Ned said. “This tourney is an extravagance the realm cannot afford.”
“改天再议。”奈德说。从他们的眼神看来，他的口气似乎太尖锐了点。要想治理，他就必须牢记，自己已不是临冬城万人之上的领主身份，在这里他不过是地位平等的重臣之首罢了。“诸位大人，请原谅我。”他改用较和缓的口气，“我实在是累了。我们今天就到此为止，等我精神好些时再继续。”说完他没有征求其他人同意，便突然站起身，朝在座的重臣一一点头后，径自离开。
“Speak to him as you will,” Lord Renly said, “we had still best make our plans.”
出到门外，只见马车和骑士依旧不断从城堡大门涌入，庭院里一片混乱，充斥着泥土、马臊味和叫喊不停的人声。有人告诉他国王还在路上。自三叉戟河的意外发生之后，史塔克家族和他们的部属便走在车队的最前面，远离兰尼斯特家族，避开两派逐渐升高的紧张气氛。劳勃几乎没有露面，据说他待在轮宫，成天喝得酩酊大醉。若真是如此，他应该还要几个小时才会出现，这已经比奈德期望的要早上许多了。如今他只消看看珊莎的脸，就觉得心中怒火又要升起。旅途的最后两周实在苦不堪言。珊莎责怪艾莉亚，说被杀的应该是娜梅莉亚。艾莉亚在得知屠夫学徒的死讯后就魂不守舍。珊莎每晚哭着入眠，艾莉亚一声不吭地独自忧伤，艾德·史塔克自己则梦见了一个专为临冬城史塔克家人准备的冰冻地狱。
“Another day,” Ned said. Perhaps too sharply, from the looks they gave him. He would have to remember that he was no longer in Winterfell, where only the king stood higher; here, he was but first among equals. “Forgive me, my lords,” he said in a softer tone. “I am tired. Let us call a halt for today and resume when we are fresher.” He did not ask for their consent, but stood abruptly, nodded at them all, and made for the door.
他穿越外庭，走过闸门，进入内院，正朝他印象中首相塔的所在走去时，小指头突然出现在面前。“史塔克，你走错路了，跟我来。”
Outside, wagons and riders were still pouring through the castle gates, and the yard was a chaos of mud and horseflesh and shouting men. The king had not yet arrived, he was told. Since the ugliness on the Trident, the Starks and their household had ridden well ahead of the main column, the better to separate themselves from the Lannisters and the growing tension. Robert had hardly been seen; the talk was he was traveling in the huge wheelhouse, drunk as often as not. If so, he might be hours behind, but he would still be here too soon for Ned’s liking. He had only to look at Sansa’s face to feel the rage twisting inside him once again. The last fortnight of their journey had been a misery. Sansa blamed Arya and told her that it should have been Nymeria who died. And Arya was lost after she heard what had happened to her butcher’s boy. Sansa cried herself to sleep, Arya brooded silently all day long, and Eddard Stark dreamed of a frozen hell reserved for the Starks of Winterfell.
奈德犹豫不决地跟着他，小指头带他进入一座塔，下了一道蜿蜒的阶梯，穿越一个凹陷的小庭院，沿着荒废的回廊行走。两旁墙壁，一副副无人使用的铠甲好似站立的卫兵。他们是坦格利安家族遗留下来的历史陈迹，黑色精钢打造，头盔镶着龙鳞，但如今积满灰尘，早已被人遗忘。“这不是通往我居室的路。”奈德道。
He crossed the outer yard, passed under a portcullis into the inner bailey, and was walking toward what he thought was the Tower of the Hand when Littlefinger appeared in front of him. “You’re going the wrong way, Stark. Come with me.”
“我说过是吗？我正打算把你引进地牢，割了喉咙，再把你的尸体封进墙里。”小指头语带讥讽。“史塔克，我们没时间废话，尊夫人正等着你。”
Hesitantly, Ned followed. Littlefinger led him into a tower, down a stair, across a small sunken courtyard, and along a deserted corridor where empty suits of armor stood sentinel along the walls. They were relics of the Targaryens, black steel with dragon scales cresting their helms, now dusty and forgotten. “This is not the way to my chambers,” Ned said.
“小指头，你到底耍什么把戏？凯特琳人在临冬城，离此数百里之遥。”
“Did I say it was? I’m leading you to the dungeons to slit your throat and seal your corpse up behind a wall,” Littlefinger replied, his voice dripping with sarcasm. “We have no time for this, Stark. Your wife awaits.”
“哦？”小指头灰绿色的眼睛里闪着饶富兴味的光芒。“那么此人的易容术果真不同凡响。我说最后一次，要么跟我来，不然我就把她据为己有啰。”
“What game are you playing, Littlefinger? Catelyn is at Winterfell, hundreds of leagues from here.”
他快步走下阶梯。
“Oh?” Littlefinger’s grey-green eyes glittered with amusement. “Then it appears someone has managed an astonishing impersonation. For the last time, come. Or don’t come, and I’ll keep her for myself.” He hurried down the steps.
奈德满怀戒心地跟上，心里不知这一天究竟何时才会结束。他对这些心机巧诈毫无兴趣，但已逐渐开始理解，对于小指头这样的人，权术和阴谋就是家常便饭。
Ned followed him warily, wondering if this day would ever end. He had no taste for these intrigues, but he was beginning to realize that they were meat and mead to a man like Littlefinger.
阶梯底端有一扇橡木和铁条制成的厚重门扉。培提尔举起门闩，挥手示意奈德进去。他发现他们正置身位于河流之上的峻峭绝壁，浸沐在黄昏的红晕里。“我们在城堡外面。”奈德道。
At the foot of the steps was a heavy door of oak and iron. Petyr Baelish lifted the crossbar and gestured Ned through. They stepped out into the ruddy glow of dusk, on a rocky bluff high above the river. “We’re outside the castle,” Ned said.
“你还真不好骗嘛，史塔克。”小指头傻笑道，“到底是太阳还是天空泄露了秘密？跟我来，岩壁上挖了可供攀附的凹洞。小心别摔死，否则凯特琳永远也不会原谅我。”说完他翻身便往下爬，动作像猴子一般灵敏。
“You are a hard man to fool, Stark,” Littlefinger said with a smirk. “Was it the sun that gave it away, or the sky? Follow me. There are niches cut in the rock. Try not to fall to your death, Catelyn would never understand.” With that, he was over the side of the cliff, descending as quick as a monkey.
奈德仔细审视了岩壁一会儿，然后慢慢地跟着下去。峭壁上果真如小指头所言，刻有浅浅的凹洞，除非你原本就知道，否则从悬崖下根本无从发现。河流离他们有一段高到令人晕眩的距离。奈德把脸贴上岩石，除非必要，尽量不往下看。
Ned studied the rocky face of the bluff for a moment, then followed more slowly. The niches were there, as Littlefinger had promised, shallow cuts that would be invisible from below, unless you knew just where to look for them. The river was a long, dizzying distance below. Ned kept his face pressed to the rock and tried not to look down any more often than he had to.
最后他总算好不容易到达底部，旁边是一条狭窄而泥泞的水滨小径，小指头正懒洋洋地靠在岩石上啃苹果。他已经快吃完了。“史塔克，你老了不中用啦。”他边说边随手把苹果核丢进激流。“没关系，接下来我们骑马。”两匹马正等在那里，奈德骑上，催马快步跟在他身后，顺着小路朝城市去。
When at last he reached the bottom, a narrow, muddy trail along the water’s edge, Littlefinger was lazing against a rock and eating an apple. He was almost down to the core. “You are growing old and slow, Stark,” he said, flipping the apple casually into the rushing water. “No matter, we ride the rest of the way.” He had two horses waiting. Ned mounted up and trotted behind him, down the trail and into the city.
最后贝里席在一栋看起来摇摇欲坠的三层木造建筑前停了下来。窗户透出灯光，在逐渐黯淡的暮色里显得特别明亮。乐声和刺耳的笑闹从内散溢，在河面上飘荡。门边有一条沉甸甸的链子挂着盏华丽的油灯，外面盖着加铅的红玻璃灯罩。
Finally Baelish drew rein in front of a ramshackle building, three stories, timbered, its windows bright with lamplight in the gathering dusk. The sounds of music and raucous laughter drifted out and floated over the water. Beside the door swung an ornate oil lamp on a heavy chain, with a globe of leaded red glass.
奈德·史塔克愤怒地跳下马。“这是家妓院。”他抓住小指头肩膀把他推得团团转。“走大老远的路，结果你竟带我上妓院？”
Ned Stark dismounted in a fury. “A brothel,” he said as he seized Littlefinger by the shoulder and spun him around. “You’ve brought me all this way to take me to a brothel.”
“你老婆在里面。”小指头说
“Your wife is inside,” Littlefinger said.
他再也忍耐不住。“布兰登对你太仁慈了。”奈德说着把小个子狠狠地往墙上撞去，抽出匕首指向他留着胡子的尖下巴。
It was the final insult. “Brandon was too kind to you,” Ned said as he slammed the small man back against a wall and shoved his dagger up under the little pointed chin beard.
“大人，快停手。”一个焦急的声音唤道。“他说的是实话。”背后传来脚步声。
“My lord, no,” an urgent voice called out. “He speaks the truth.” There were footsteps behind him.
奈德握刀转身。只见一个身穿褐色粗布衣服，下颚的软肉随着跑步不住颤动的白发老人急急忙忙朝他们跑来。“这不干你的事。”奈德才刚开口，突然认出来者。他放下匕首，惊讶万分。“罗德利克爵士？”
Ned spun, knife in hand, as an old white-haired man hurried toward them. He was dressed in brown roughspun, and the soft flesh under his chin wobbled as he ran. “This is no business of yours,” Ned began; then, suddenly, the recognition came. He lowered the dagger, astonished. “Ser Rodrik?”
罗德利克爵士点点头。“夫人在楼上等您。”
Rodrik Cassel nodded. “Your lady awaits you upstairs.”
奈德糊涂了。“凯特琳真的在这里？不是小指头的恶作剧？”他收起武器。
Ned was lost. “Catelyn is truly here? This is not some strange jape of Littlefinger’s?” He sheathed his blade.
“我有那本事倒好，史塔克。”小指头道，“随我来罢。还有，脸上表情露骨一点，不要一副正襟危坐的首相模样。你要是被认出来，那可就糟了。不介意的话，经过时摸两把奶子。”
“Would that it were, Stark,” Littlefinger said. “Follow me, and try to look a shade more lecherous and a shade less like the King’s Hand. It would not do to have you recognized. Perhaps you could fondle a breast or two, just in passing.”
他们走进屋内，穿过拥挤的大厅，有个胖女人正唱着歌词淫秽的曲子，身穿轻薄罗衫的美少女坐在恩客腿上撒娇。没人理会奈德。罗德利克爵士等在楼下，由小指头领他走上三楼，穿过回廊，进了门。
They went inside, through a crowded common room where a fat woman was singing bawdy songs while pretty young girls in linen shifts and wisps of colored silk pressed themselves against their lovers and dandled on their laps. No one paid Ned the least bit of attention. Ser Rodrik waited below while Littlefinger led him up to the third floor, along a corridor, and through a door.
凯特琳正在里面，她一见他便叫出声来，朝他飞奔过去，紧紧地抱住他。
Inside, Catelyn was waiting. She cried out when she saw him, ran to him, and embraced him fiercely.
“夫人。”奈德惊讶地轻声说。
“My lady,” Ned whispered in wonderment.
“哟，好极了。”小指头说着关上门。“您认得她。”
“Oh, very good,” said Littlefinger, closing the door. “You recognized her.”
“大人，我好怕你不会来。”她贴在他胸膛上细语。“培提尔一直捎来你的消息。他告诉我艾莉亚和年轻王子的事了。我的乖女儿们都还好么？”
“I feared you’d never come, my lord,” she whispered against his chest. “Petyr has been bringing me reports. He told me of your troubles with Arya and the young prince. How are my girls?”
“她俩都很难过，也很愤怒。”他对她说，“凯特，我不懂。你来君临做什么？发生了什么事？”奈德询问妻子。“是布兰的事？难道他……”死这个字几乎就要脱口而出，但他无法启齿。
“Both in mourning, and full of anger,” he told her. “Cat, I do not understand. What are you doing in King’s Landing? What’s happened?” Ned asked his wife. “Is it Bran? Is he …” Dead was the word that came to his lips, but he could not say it.
“是布兰的事，但不是你想的那样。”凯特琳道。
“It is Bran, but not as you think,” Catelyn said.
奈德更摸不着头脑。“那是怎么回事？亲爱的，你为什么会在这里？这又是什么地方？”
Ned was lost. “Then how? Why are you here, my love? What is this place?”
“你觉得这里看起来像什么？”小指头说着在窗边落座。“这就是家妓院。还有什么地方比这里更不可能找到凯特琳·徒利呢？”他微笑，“说来也巧，这家店恰好就是由我经营，所以要安排很简单。我可是极力避免让兰尼斯特的人得知凯特在君临的消息。”
“Just what it appears,” Littlefinger said, easing himself onto a window seat. “A brothel. Can you think of a less likely place to find a Catelyn Tully?” He smiled. “As it chances, I own this particular establishment, so arrangements were easily made. I am most anxious to keep the Lannisters from learning that Cat is here in King’s Landing.”
“为什么？”奈德问，这时他才看见她的手怪异的姿势，看见那尚未愈合的红色伤疤，左手小指和无名指僵硬不便的样子。“你受伤了。”他握起她的手反复检视。“老天，伤得好深……这是剑伤还是……夫人，怎么会发生这种事？”
“Why?” Ned asked. He saw her hands then, the awkward way she held them, the raw red scars, the stiffness of the last two fingers on her left. “You’ve been hurt.” He took her hands in his own, turned them over. “Gods. Those are deep cuts … a gash from a sword or … how did this happen, my lady?”
凯特琳从斗篷下抽出一把匕首交给他。“有人带着这把刀要取布兰性命。”
Catelyn slid a dagger out from under her cloak and placed it in his hand. “This blade was sent to open Bran’s throat and spill his life’s blood.”
奈德猛地抬头。“但是……谁……谁会这么……”
Ned’s head jerked up. “But … who … why would …”
她伸出手指贴上他嘴唇。“亲爱的，让我说比较快。你好好听着罢。”
She put a finger to his lips. “Let me tell it all, my love. It will go faster that way. Listen.”
于是他仔细聆听，而她将事情始末和盘托出，从藏书塔大火、瓦里斯、前来迎接她的都城守备队一直说到小指头。等她说完，艾德·史塔克手握匕首，呆若木鸡地坐在桌边。布兰的狼救了那孩子一命，他呆滞地思索着。当初琼恩在雪地里找到那群小狼时，他说了些什么？大人，您的孩子注定要拥有这些小狼。结果他却亲手杀了珊莎的狼，到头来这是为了什么？他现在的感觉是罪恶？还是恐惧？假如这些狼实乃上天所赐，他究竟犯了何等滔天大罪？
So he listened, and she told it all, from the fire in the library tower to Varys and the guardsmen and Littlefinger. And when she was done, Eddard Stark sat dazed beside the table, the dagger in his hand. Bran’s wolf had saved the boy’s life, he thought dully. What was it that Jon had said when they found the pups in the snow? Your children were meant to have these pups, my lord . And he had killed Sansa’s, and for what? Was it guilt he was feeling? Or fear? If the gods had sent these wolves, what folly had he done?
奈德痛苦地强迫自己将思绪拉回眼前的匕首，思考隐含其后的含义。“小恶魔的刀。”他复诵。这太不合理。他紧握平滑的龙骨刀柄，将之狠狠地插进桌面，感觉它深深地咬入木头。匕首就这么立着，仿佛在嘲弄他。“提利昂·兰尼斯特为什么要布兰的命？那孩子从没招惹他。”
Painfully, Ned forced his thoughts back to the dagger and what it meant. “The Imp’s dagger,” he repeated. It made no sense. His hand curled around the smooth dragonbone hilt, and he slammed the blade into the table, felt it bite into the wood. It stood mocking him. “Why should Tyrion Lannister want Bran dead? The boy has never done him harm.”
“你们史塔克家的人都没脑筋的？”小指头问，“小恶魔当然不会单独行动。”
“Do you Starks have nought but snow between your ears?” Littlefinger asked. “The Imp would never have acted alone.”
奈德起身，绕着房间踱步。“难道说王后亦参与此事？或者，诸神在上，连国王他也……不，绝对不可能。”他一边说着，一边想起了那个荒冢地的清冷早晨，劳勃提到派刺客去对付坦格利安公主。他忆起雷加那尚在襁褓的儿子，血淋淋的头颅，以及国王置之不理的态度，正如不久以前他在戴瑞的会客厅里的所作所为。珊莎的哀告至今犹在耳际，一如莱安娜临终前的恳求。
Ned rose and paced the length of the room. “If the queen had a role in this or, gods forbid, the king himself … no, I will not believe that.” Yet even as he said the words, he remembered that chill morning on the barrowlands, and Robert’s talk of sending hired knives after the Targaryen princess. He remembered Rhaegar’s infant son, the red ruin of his skull, and the way the king had turned away, as he had turned away in Darry’s audience hall not so long ago. He could still hear Sansa pleading, as Lyanna had pleaded once.
“国王八成不知情。”小指头道，“这也不是第一次了，对于不想知道的事，咱们的好劳勃向来是眼不见为净。”
“Most likely the king did not know,” Littlefinger said. “It would not be the first time. Our good Robert is practiced at closing his eyes to things he would rather not see.”
奈德没有答话。屠夫小弟的那张几乎被劈成两半的脸浮现在他眼前，然而国王半声也没吭。他的脑袋开始轰轰作响。
Ned had no reply for that. The face of the butcher’s boy swam up before his eyes, cloven almost in two, and afterward the king had said not a word. His head was pounding.
小指头晃到桌边，把匕首从木头里拔出。“无论怎样行动，都构成叛国罪。若是控告国王，只怕你话还没出口就先被伊林·派恩给宰了。若是王后……除非你能找到证据，而且能让劳勃听进去，才有可能……”
Littlefinger sauntered over to the table, wrenched the knife from the wood. “The accusation is treason either way. Accuse the king and you will dance with Ilyn Payne before the words are out of your mouth. The queen … if you can find proof, and if you can make Robert listen, then perhaps …”
“我们有证据，”奈德道，“我们有这把匕首。”
“We have proof,” Ned said. “We have the dagger.”
“这个？”小指头漫不经心地把玩着匕首。“大人，这是把好刀，好刀都是两面开刃的。小恶魔肯定会辩称匕首是他在临冬城期间弄丢或是被偷。既然他雇的杀手已死，谁能证明他所言真假呢？”他把刀子轻轻抛给奈德。“我建议你还是把这玩意儿丢进河里，当它根本就不存在罢。”
“This?” Littlefinger flipped the knife casually end over end. “A sweet piece of steel, but it cuts two ways, my lord. The Imp will no doubt swear the blade was lost or stolen while he was at Winterfell, and with his hireling dead, who is there to give him the lie?” He tossed the knife lightly to Ned. “My counsel is to drop that in the river and forget that it was ever forged.”
奈德冷冷地看着他。“贝里席大人，我是临冬城史塔克家族的人。我的儿子成了残废，很可能还活不成。若没有那只我们在雪地里找到的小狼，他此刻已经死了，凯特琳很可能也会陪着他送命。假如你真以为我会装作没事，那你就和当年向我哥哥挑战一样愚蠢。”
Ned regarded him coldly. “Lord Baelish, I am a Stark of Winterfell. My son lies crippled, perhaps dying. He would be dead, and Catelyn with him, but for a wolf pup we found in the snow. If you truly believe I could forget that, you are as big a fool now as when you took up sword against my brother.”
“史塔克，我蠢是蠢……可还活得好好的，令兄倒已经在冰封的坟墓里发霉了十四年。你这么迫不及待要步他后尘，我也无法劝阻，不过我先声明，你可千万别把我牵扯进去，非常感谢。”
“A fool I may be, Stark … yet I’m still here, while your brother has been moldering in his frozen grave for some fourteen years now. If you are so eager to molder beside him, far be it from me to dissuade you, but I would rather not be included in the party, thank you very much.”
“很好，贝里席大人，不管我做什么，最不想与之为伍的人就是你。”
“You would be the last man I would willingly include in any party, Lord Baelish.”
“这话我听了好伤心啊。”小指头伸手按住心口。“我自己嘛，总觉得你们史塔克家的人实在无趣得很，但凯特不知怎地始终离不开你。所以呢，为着她的缘故，我会尽量不让你送命。说来只有笨蛋才会这么做，但我就是没法拒绝你老婆的任何请求。”
“You wound me deeply.” Littlefinger placed a hand over his heart. “For my part, I always found you Starks a tiresome lot, but Cat seems to have become attached to you, for reasons I cannot comprehend. I shall try to keep you alive for her sake. A fool’s task, admittedly, but I could never refuse your wife anything.”
“我把我们关于琼恩·艾林死因的怀疑告诉了培提尔。”凯特琳道，“他答应协助你调查真相。”
“I told Petyr our suspicions about Jon Arryn’s death,” Catelyn said. “He has promised to help you find the truth.”
对艾德·史塔克而言，这并非好消息，不过他们确实需要援手，而小指头和凯特曾经情同姐弟。再说这也不是奈德第一次被迫与他所轻视的人妥协了。“好罢，”他把匕首插进腰带，“你刚说到瓦里斯，他也知道整件事的来龙去脉？”
That was not news that Eddard Stark welcomed, but it was true enough that they needed help, and Littlefinger had been almost a brother to Cat once. It would not be the first time that Ned had been forced to make common cause with a man he despised. “Very well,” he said, thrusting the dagger into his belt. “You spoke of Varys. Does the eunuch know all of it?”
“如果知道，也一定不是我说的。”凯特琳道，“艾德·史塔克，你娶的人可不笨。但瓦里斯有办法知道别人不可能知道的事。奈德，我相信这家伙懂得妖术。”
“Not from my lips,” Catelyn said. “You did not wed a fool, Eddard Stark. But Varys has ways of learning things that no man could know. He has some dark art, Ned, I swear it.”
“他的走狗满天下，这是众所周知的事。”奈德鄙夷地说。
“He has spies, that is well known,” Ned said, dismissive.
“不只如此，”凯特琳坚持，“罗德利克爵士和艾伦·桑塔加爵士的会面自始至终都秘密进行，但这蜘蛛不知怎么就是知道谈话内容。我很怕这个人。”
“It is more than that,” Catelyn insisted. “Ser Rodrik spoke to Ser Aron Santagar in all secrecy, yet somehow the Spider knew of their conversation. I fear that man.”
小指头微笑。“好夫人，瓦里斯伯爵就交给我来对付。容我说几句脏话——还有什么地方比这里更适合了呢？——他的卵蛋被我大大方方地捏在手掌心。”他合拢指头，笑了，“当然啰，这里假设他是个有卵蛋的男人。你不妨这么想，假如喜鹊会开口，小小鸟儿要歌唱，那么瓦里斯是不会喜欢的。好啦，如果我是你，与其担心那太监，不如多提防兰尼斯特的人。”
Littlefinger smiled. “Leave Lord Varys to me, sweet lady. If you will permit me a small obscenity—and where better for it than here—I hold the man’s balls in the palm of my hand.” He cupped his fingers, smiling. “Or would, if he were a man, or had any balls. You see, if the pie is opened, the birds begin to sing, and Varys would not like that. Were I you, I would worry more about the Lannisters and less about the eunuch.”
奈德无需小指头提醒。他想起找到艾莉亚那天的场景，想起王后当时的神情。谁说我们没有狼？那么地轻声细语。他想到男孩米凯，想到琼恩·艾林的猝死，还有布兰坠楼，以及丧心病狂的老王伊里斯·坦格利安躺在王座厅的地板上奄奄一息，他的血在镀金宝剑上慢慢干涸的场面。“夫人，”他转向凯特琳，“你留在这里也无济于事，我希望你即刻返回临冬城。所谓有其一必有其二，难保以后不会有其他刺客上门滋事。不管背后主谋是谁，他一定很快就得知布兰活了下来。”
Ned did not need Littlefinger to tell him that. He was thinking back to the day Arya had been found, to the look on the queen’s face when she said, We have a wolf , so soft and quiet. He was thinking of the boy Mycah, of Jon Arryn’s sudden death, of Bran’s fall, of old mad Aerys Targaryen dying on the floor of his throne room while his life’s blood dried on a gilded blade. “My lady,” he said, turning to Catelyn, “there is nothing more you can do here. I want you to return to Winterfell at once. If there was one assassin, there could be others. Whoever ordered Bran’s death will learn soon enough that the boy still lives.”
“我本想见见女儿……”凯特琳道。
“I had hoped to see the girls …” Catelyn said.
“那就太不明智了。”小指头插话。“红堡处处隔墙有耳，更何况小孩子口风不紧。”
“That would be most unwise,” Littlefinger put in. “The Red Keep is full of curious eyes, and children talk.”
“亲爱的，他说得有理。”奈德告诉她，一边给她拥抱。“带上罗德利克爵士，启程回临冬城去罢。我会好好照顾女儿们。回到我们的儿子身边，保护好他们。”
“He speaks truly, my love,” Ned told her. He embraced her. “Take Ser Rodrik and ride for Winterfell. I will watch over the girls. Go home to our sons and keep them safe.”
“那就这样，大人”凯特琳抬起脸，奈德吻了她。她受伤的手用一种近乎绝望的力量环抱住他的背，仿佛要将他永远留在自己安全的怀抱里。
“As you say, my lord.” Catelyn lifted her face, and Ned kissed her. Her maimed fingers clutched against his back with a desperate strength, as if to hold him safe forever in the shelter of her arms.
“老爷、夫人莫不借卧室一用？”小指头问，“不过我先提醒你，史塔克，在这儿开房办事是要收费的。”
“Would the lord and lady like the use of a bedchamber?” asked Littlefinger. “I should warn you, Stark, we usually charge for that sort of thing around here.”
“让我们独处一下就好。”凯特琳道。
“A moment alone, that’s all I ask,” Catelyn said.
“也罢。”小指头朝门边走去。“别拖太久。我和首相大人早该回到城里，以免失踪太久他人起疑。”
“Very well.” Littlefinger strolled to the door. “Don’t be too long. It is past time the Hand and I returned to the castle, before our absence is noted.”
凯特琳走到他身边握住他的手。“培提尔，我永远不会忘记你的帮助。你手下来找我的时候，我原不知自己将落入朋友还是敌人的手中。结果我发现你不仅是朋友，还是我失散多年的弟弟。”
Catelyn went to him and took his hands in her own. “I will not forget the help you gave me, Petyr. When your men came for me, I did not know whether they were taking me to a friend or an enemy. I have found you more than a friend. I have found a brother I’d thought lost.”
培提尔·贝里席微笑道：“好夫人，我这人就是多愁善感，这话还请你千万别告诉他人。这些年来我在宫廷里费尽心力，想让别人以为我是个既邪恶又残酷的人，实在不愿就这么功亏一篑。”
Petyr Baelish smiled. “I am desperately sentimental, sweet lady. Best not tell anyone. I have spent years convincing the court that I am wicked and cruel, and I should hate to see all that hard work go for naught.”
这番话奈德是一个字也不信，但他还是彬彬有礼地说：“贝里席大人，我也感谢您。”
Ned believed not a word of that, but he kept his voice polite as he said, “You have my thanks as well, Lord Baelish.”
“哟，这可是东洋宝贝。”小指头说着离开房间。
“Oh, now there’s a treasure,” Littlefinger said, exiting.
房门关上后，奈德转身面对他的妻子。“你一到家，立刻以我的名义送信给赫曼·陶哈和盖伯特·葛洛佛，命令他们各调一百名弓箭手协防卡林湾。两百弓箭手足以阻挡任何军队北上颈泽。指示曼德勒伯爵加紧维修白港的防御工事，并确保守军充足。还有，从今往后，我希望你特别看紧席恩·葛雷乔伊。倘若战争爆发，我们非常需要他父亲的舰队。”
When the door had closed behind him, Ned turned back to his wife. “Once you are home, send word to Helman Tallhart and Galbart Glover under my seal. They are to raise a hundred bowmen each and fortify Moat Cailin. Two hundred determined archers can hold the Neck against an army. Instruct Lord Manderly that he is to strengthen and repair all his defenses at White Harbor, and see that they are well manned. And from this day on, I want a careful watch kept over Theon Greyjoy. If there is war, we shall have sore need of his father’s fleet.”
“战争爆发？”恐惧清楚地写在凯特琳脸上。
“War?” The fear was plain on Catelyn’s face.
“情势不致恶化到那个地步的。”奈德向她保证，心中暗自祈祷真是如此。他再度搂她入怀。“兰尼斯特家对待弱者毫不留情，伊里斯·坦格利安就是最好的教训。然而除非他们有全国的军力作后盾，否则决不敢进犯北方，而他们作梦也别想有那样的一天。我必须玩这场愚人的假面舞会，继续装出若无其事的样子。记得我来此的目的么，亲爱的？我要找出兰尼斯特家谋杀琼恩·艾林的证据……”
“It will not come to that,” Ned promised her, praying it was true. He took her in his arms again. “The Lannisters are merciless in the face of weakness, as Aerys Targaryen learned to his sorrow, but they would not dare attack the north without all the power of the realm behind them, and that they shall not have. I must play out this fool’s masquerade as if nothing is amiss. Remember why I came here, my love. If I find proof that the Lannisters murdered Jon Arryn …”
他感觉到凯特琳在他怀里颤抖，她伤残的手紧紧抱住他。“若真找到了，”她说，“接下来怎么办，亲爱的？”
He felt Catelyn tremble in his arms. Her scarred hands clung to him. “If,” she said, “what then, my love?”
接下来是最危险的部分，奈德明白。“国王乃是至高的法律仲裁，”他告诉她，“待我查明真相，我将觐见劳勃。”届时我只能祈祷他仍保有意想中的英明，而非我所恐惧的昏庸，他在心里默默地说完。
That was the most dangerous part, Ned knew. “All justice flows from the king,” he told her. “When I know the truth, I must go to Robert.” And pray that he is the man I think he is , he finished silently, and not the man I fear he has become .
第二十二章 提利昂
*TYRION
“你真急着要走？”总司令问他。
“A re you certain that you must leave us so soon?” the Lord Commander asked him.
“急不可待啊，莫尔蒙大人。”提利昂答道，“不然詹姆老哥就要担心我出了事，搞不好还以为您劝说我加入黑衣军了呢。”
“Past certain, Lord Mormont,” Tyrion replied. “My brother Jaime will be wondering what has become of me. He may decide that you have convinced me to take the black.”
“果真能如此倒好。”莫尔蒙拣起一只蟹爪，喀啦一声用手剥开。总司令年纪虽然大了，却仍然有熊一般的力量。“提利昂，你生了副好头脑，长城守军很需要你这样的人。”
“Would that I could.” Mormont picked up a crab claw and cracked it in his fist. Old as he was, the Lord Commander still had the strength of a bear. “You’re a cunning man, Tyrion. We have need of men of your sort on the Wall.”
提利昂嘻笑道：“莫尔蒙大人，为您这句话，我一定得把全国的侏儒通通找来给您。”趁众人哄堂大笑，他把蟹角的肉吸进嘴，伸手又拿一只。这些螃蟹当天早上才从东海望运来，送到的时候还冷冻在冰桶里，因此特别鲜美多汁。
Tyrion grinned. “Then I shall scour the Seven Kingdoms for dwarfs and ship them all to you, Lord Mormont.” As they laughed, he sucked the meat from a crab leg and reached for another. The crabs had arrived from Eastwatch only this morning, packed in a barrel of snow, and they were succulent.
艾里沙·索恩爵士是席间惟一没笑的人。“这兰尼斯特明明是在讽刺我们。”
Ser Alliser Thorne was the only man at table who did not so much as crack a smile. “Lannister mocks us.”
“不是‘你们’，艾里沙爵士，是你。”提利昂道。这次席间的笑声里隐隐带着焦虑不安的气氛。
“Only you, Ser Alliser,” Tyrion said. This time the laughter round the table had a nervous, uncertain quality to it.
索恩盯住提利昂，黑眼睛里带着憎恨。“我看你个头虽然半个人都不到，说起话来倒是口无遮拦。或许我们应该下场子较量较量。”
Thorne’s black eyes fixed on Tyrion with loathing. “You have a bold tongue for someone who is less than half a man. Perhaps you and I should visit the yard together.”
“何苦呢？”提利昂问，“螃蟹都在这儿呐。”
“Why?” asked Tyrion. “The crabs are here.”
此话一出，众人更是捧腹狂笑。艾里沙爵士抿紧嘴唇，站了起来。“有种你拿上武器，再开玩笑试试看。”
The remark brought more guffaws from the others. Ser Alliser stood up, his mouth a tight line. “Come and make your japes with steel in your hand.”
提利昂故意看看自己右手。“哎呀，艾里沙爵士，这会儿我不就握着武器嘛，虽然只是把吃螃蟹的叉子。怎么，咱们要不要比划比划？”他跳上椅子，开始用那把小叉子戳索恩的胸膛。人们的笑声简直连屋顶都要掀翻。总司令更是连蟹肉都喷了出来，呛得边咳嗽边喘气。他的乌鸦也没闲着，从窗边大声怪叫：“比划！比划！比划！”。
Tyrion looked pointedly at his right hand. “Why, I have steel in my hand, Ser Alliser, although it appears to be a crab fork. Shall we duel?” He hopped up on his chair and began poking at Thorne’s chest with the tiny fork. Roars of laughter filled the tower room. Bits of crab flew from the Lord Commander’s mouth as he began to gasp and choke. Even his raven joined in, cawing loudly from above the window. “Duel! Duel! Duel!”
艾里沙·索恩爵士僵着身子离开大厅，那模样就像胸前被人插了一把匕首。
Ser Alliser Thorne walked from the room so stiffly it looked as though he had a dagger up his butt.
莫尔蒙仍然喘不过气，提利昂拍拍他的背。“战利品归胜利者所有，”他高声宣布，“索恩的螃蟹是我的啦。”
Mormont was still gasping for breath. Tyrion pounded him on the back. “To the victor goes the spoils,” he called out. “I claim Thorne’s share of the crabs.”
总司令好不容易恢复过来。“你看你把咱们艾里沙爵士整成什么样了，你真是个坏心眼的家伙。”他责怪道。
Finally the Lord Commander recovered himself. “You are a wicked man, to provoke our Ser Alliser so,” he scolded.
提利昂正襟危坐，啜了口葡萄酒。“有人要在胸前划上标靶，就该有挨箭的心理准备。比你们艾里沙爵士还有幽默感的死人我见得多了。”
Tyrion seated himself and took a sip of wine. “If a man paints a target on his chest, he should expect that sooner or later someone will loose an arrow at him. I have seen dead men with more humor than your Ser Alliser.”
“这样说就不公平了。”总务长波文·马尔锡长得又红又胖，活像颗石榴。“你应该听听他帮手下受训的小鬼起的绰号有多可笑。”
“Not so,” objected the Lord Steward, Bowen Marsh, a man as round and red as a pomegranate. “You ought to hear the droll names he gives the lads he trains.”
提利昂知道几个这样的绰号。“我敢打赌那些小鬼帮他取的绰号也不少。”他说：“各位大人，擦亮你们的眼睛吧。艾里沙·索恩爵士能做的是清理马粪，而非训练新兵。”
Tyrion had heard a few of those droll names. “I’ll wager the lads have a few names for him as well,” he said. “Chip the ice off your eyes, my good lords. Ser Alliser Thorne should be mucking out your stables, not drilling your young warriors.”
“守夜人一点也不缺马夫。”莫尔蒙司令咕哝道，“这年头送来的都是这路货色。不是马僮，就是小偷或强奸犯。艾里沙爵士是我接任司令以来，参加黑衣军的少数几位经正式册封的骑士。他在君临之战中表现很英勇。”
“The Watch has no shortage of stableboys,” Lord Mormont grumbled. “That seems to be all they send us these days. Stableboys and sneak thieves and rapers. Ser Alliser is an anointed knight, one of the few to take the black since I have been Lord Commander. He fought bravely at King’s Landing.”
“只可惜站错了队，”杰瑞米·莱克爵士冷冷地说，“偏偏我跟他一块犯傻。当时我同他站在城墙上，泰温·兰尼斯特开出的条件宽厚得紧，要嘛穿上黑衣，不然就等着天黑前头被插上枪尖。啊，提利昂，我这话可不是找你碴。”
“On the wrong side,” Ser Jaremy Rykker commented dryly. “I ought to know, I was there on the battlements beside him. Tywin Lannister gave us a splendid choice. Take the black, or see our heads on spikes before evenfall. No offense intended, Tyrion.”
“没关系，杰瑞米爵士。我老爸很爱把首级挂城墙上，尤其是惹过他的人。以您这张高贵的脸嘛，呃，我看他八成会把你的头挂上国王大门。我猜一定特别引人注目。”
“None taken, Ser Jaremy. My father is very fond of spiked heads, especially those of people who have annoyed him in some fashion. And a face as noble as yours, well, no doubt he saw you decorating the city wall above the King’s Gate. I think you would have looked very striking up there.”
“多谢你哟。”杰瑞米爵士面带讥讽地微笑。
“Thank you,” Ser Jaremy replied with a sardonic smile.
莫尔蒙司令清清喉咙。“提利昂，有时候我真觉得艾里沙爵士说得没错，你的确是在嘲弄我们和我们神圣的使命。”
Lord Commander Mormont cleared his throat. “Sometimes I fear Ser Alliser saw you true, Tyrion. You do mock us and our noble purpose here.”
提利昂耸耸肩。“莫尔蒙大人，我们不时需要被嘲弄嘲弄，以免生活太过严肃。请再帮我倒点酒。”他递出酒杯。
Tyrion shrugged. “We all need to be mocked from time to time, Lord Mormont, lest we start to take ourselves too seriously. More wine, please.” He held out his cup.
莱克一边帮他斟酒，波文·马尔锡一边说：“你个子不大，酒量倒是不小。”
As Rykker filled it for him, Bowen Marsh said, “You have a great thirst for a small man.”
“噢，我却觉得提利昂大人一点也不小。”坐在长桌末端的伊蒙学士说，守夜人部队的高级官员们立刻都安静下来，凝神倾听长者的话。“他是我们中的巨人，一个来到世界尽头的巨人。”
“Oh, I think that Lord Tyrion is quite a large man,” Maester Aemon said from the far end of the table. He spoke softly, yet the high officers of the Night’s Watch all fell quiet, the better to hear what the ancient had to say. “I think he is a giant come among us, here at the end of the world.”
提利昂轻声答道：“好师傅，我有过的绰号不老少，可‘巨人’还是头一遭听到。”
Tyrion answered gently, “I’ve been called many things, my lord, but giant is seldom one of them.”
“是这样么，”伊蒙师傅道，他白浊的眼翳朝提利昂脸上移去。“我说的可是真心话。”
“Nonetheless,” Maester Aemon said as his clouded, milk-white eyes moved to Tyrion’s face, “I think it is true.”
提利昂竟无言以对。他只有礼貌性地低头说：“伊蒙师傅，您太客气了。”
For once, Tyrion Lannister found himself at a loss for words. He could only bow his head politely and say, “You are too kind, Maester Aemon.”
盲眼学士微微一笑。他是个瘦小的老人，满脸皱纹，头已全秃，畏缩于沉重的百年岁月之下，颈间学士项链上的各种金属松垮地挂在咽喉。“我受过的谬赞也不少，可‘客气’倒是头一遭听到。”这一回提利昂率先笑了。
The blind man smiled. He was a tiny thing, wrinkled and hairless, shrunken beneath the weight of a hundred years so his maester’s collar with its links of many metals hung loose about his throat. “I have been called many things, my lord,” he said, “but kind is seldom one of them.” This time Tyrion himself led the laughter.
晚膳用毕，旁人陆续离去之后，莫尔蒙请提利昂在火炉边坐下，递给他一杯烫过的酒，辛辣得使他眼泪都流了下来。“我们地处极北，国王大道这里的路段恐怕好生危险。”他们边喝酒，总司令官边说。
Much later, when the serious business of eating was done and the others had left, Mormont offered Tyrion a chair beside the fire and a cup of mulled spirits so strong they brought tears to his eyes. “The kingsroad can be perilous this far north,” the Lord Commander told him as they drank.
“我有杰克和莫里斯，”提利昂道，“而且尤伦正好也要南下。”
“I have Jyck and Morrec,” Tyrion said, “and Yoren is riding south again.”
“尤伦一个人怎么够。守夜人会护送你到临冬城。”莫尔蒙的口气不容辩驳。“至少要三个人。”
“Yoren is only one man. The Watch shall escort you as far as Winterfell,” Mormont announced in a tone that brooked no argument. “Three men should be sufficient.”
“司令大人，那我就恭敬不如从命。”提利昂说，“您不妨派出雪诺那小子，让他跟兄弟见个面也好。”
“If you insist, my lord,” Tyrion said. “You might send young Snow. He would be glad for a chance to see his brothers.”
莫尔蒙隔着厚厚的灰胡子皱眉道：“雪诺？喔，你是说史塔克那个私生子啊。我看不妥。年轻人得忘掉他们过去的生活，不管兄弟还是老妈都得放下。回家探亲只会再度激起这些早该忘却的情感。我很清楚这些事。我自己的家人……自我儿子辱没家门，只剩我妹妹梅姬接手统治熊岛，我有好些外甥女都没见过。”他灌了口酒。“再说，雪诺只是个小鬼。我要派三个强壮的战士来确保你的安全。”
Mormont frowned through his thick grey beard. “Snow? Oh, the Stark bastard. I think not. The young ones need to forget the lives they left behind them, the brothers and mothers and all that. A visit home would only stir up feelings best left alone. I know these things. My own blood kin … my sister Maege rules Bear Island now, since my son’s dishonor. I have nieces I have never seen.” He took a swallow. “Besides, Jon Snow is only a boy. You shall have three strong swords, to keep you safe.”
“莫尔蒙大人，我真是太感激您的关心了。”烈酒让提利昂飘飘欲醉，但还不至于醉到分不清熊老有事相求的地步。“希望我能回报您的恩情。”
“I am touched by your concern, Lord Mormont.” The strong drink was making Tyrion light-headed, but not so drunk that he did not realize that the Old Bear wanted something from him. “I hope I can repay your kindness.”
“你当然能，”莫尔蒙直言不讳，“令姐贵为当今王后，令兄是个伟大的骑士，令尊更是当今七国最有权势的人物。请代我们向他们请愿，告诉他们我们是如何迫切地需要援助。大人，您也亲眼看到了，守夜人部队正在逐渐凋零。我们的人力只剩不到一千，六百守在这里，两百在影子塔，东海望的驻军更少，而其中真正能作战的还不到三分之一——长城则足足有三百里之长。请您想想，要是敌人来袭，每一里我只能派三个人去守。”
“You can,” Mormont said bluntly. “Your sister sits beside the king. Your brother is a great knight, and your father the most powerful lord in the Seven Kingdoms. Speak to them for us. Tell them of our need here. You have seen for yourself, my lord. The Night’s Watch is dying. Our strength is less than a thousand now. Six hundred here, two hundred in the Shadow Tower, even fewer at Eastwatch, and a scant third of those fighting men. The Wall is a hundred leagues long. Think on that. Should an attack come, I have three men to defend each mile of wall.”
“三又三分之一个。”提利昂打了个呵欠。
“Three and a third,” Tyrion said with a yawn.
莫尔蒙似乎没在意他的话，老人伸手在火炉前取暖。“我派班扬·史塔克去找约恩·罗伊斯的儿子，他第一次出外巡逻便失踪了。罗伊斯那小子嫩得跟夏天的青草一样，可他偏要坚持亲自领队，说是身为骑士的职责。我因为不想冒犯他老爸，便由他去了。更愚蠢的是，我还派了两个部队里的顶尖好手跟他一道走。”
Mormont scarcely seemed to hear him. The old man warmed his hands before the fire. “I sent Benjen Stark to search after Yohn Royce’s son, lost on his first ranging. The Royce boy was green as summer grass, yet he insisted on the honor of his own command, saying it was his due as a knight. I did not wish to offend his lord father, so I yielded. I sent him out with two men I deemed as good as any in the Watch. More fool I.”
“愚蠢。”乌鸦同意。提利昂抬头看去，鸟儿用珠子似的黑眼睛睥睨他，抖动着翅膀。“愚蠢。”它又叫。他很想勒死这只鸟，但想到老莫尔蒙必定会生气，只好作罢。
“Fool,” the raven agreed. Tyrion glanced up. The bird peered down at him with those beady black eyes, ruffling its wings. “Fool,” it called again. Doubtless old Mormont would take it amiss if he throttled the creature. A pity.
老司令官毫不理会那只惹人厌的鸟。“盖瑞年纪跟我差不多，但待在长城的时间更久。”他继续说下去，“但他后来似乎是背弃誓言逃跑了。我本来不相信，觉得再怎么也轮不到他，直到他的首级被史塔克大人从临冬城送了来。至于罗伊斯那小子，则是音讯全无。一个逃兵，两个下落不明，这会儿连班扬·史塔克也不见踪影。”他深深叹口气。“这下我该派谁去找他呢？再过两年我都七十了，又老又疲惫，没法再撑下去。然而要是我撒手不管，谁能接手？艾里沙·索恩？波文·马尔锡？若我连他们的真本事都看不清，我就跟伊蒙师傅一样瞎。如今的守夜人部队不过是群郁闷不乐的小伙子和身心俱疲的老头子组成的乌合之众罢了。除了今晚跟我同桌用餐的人，我手下大概只有二十个人识字，能思考、计划或领导的人更少。从前守夜人军团每逢夏季便大兴土木，每任司令官都会加高城墙，而今我们光维持现状都非常吃力。”
The Lord Commander took no notice of the irritating bird. “Gared was near as old as I am and longer on the Wall,” he went on, “yet it would seem he forswore himself and fled. I should never have believed it, not of him, but Lord Eddard sent me his head from Winterfell. Of Royce, there is no word. One deserter and two men lost, and now Ben Stark too has gone missing.” He sighed deeply. “Who am I to send searching after him? In two years I will be seventy. Too old and too weary for the burden I bear, yet if I set it down, who will pick it up? Alliser Thorne? Bowen Marsh? I would have to be as blind as Maester Aemon not to see what they are. The Night’s Watch has become an army of sullen boys and tired old men. Apart from the men at my table tonight, I have perhaps twenty who can read, and even fewer who can think, or plan, or lead . Once the Watch spent its summers building, and each Lord Commander raised the Wall higher than he found it. Now it is all we can do to stay alive.”
提利昂明白对方话中的迫切，他不禁为眼前这名老人微微感到难过。这位前伯爵大半生都在长城度过，他需要相信自己这些年活得有意义。“我保证会向国王陛下禀报此事，”提利昂郑重地说，“我也会向家父和家兄提起。”这可不是阳奉阴违，提利昂·兰尼斯特向来说话算话。只是他没把其他的部分说出来：劳勃国王不会理睬他，泰温公爵会问他是否神智不清，詹姆则只会哈哈大笑。
He was in deadly earnest, Tyrion realized. He felt faintly embarrassed for the old man. Lord Mormont had spent a good part of his life on the Wall, and he needed to believe if those years were to have any meaning. “I promise, the king will hear of your need,” Tyrion said gravely, “and I will speak to my father and my brother Jaime as well.” And he would. Tyrion Lannister was as good as his word. He left the rest unsaid; that King Robert would ignore him, Lord Tywin would ask if he had taken leave of his senses, and Jaime would only laugh.
“提利昂，你还年轻，”莫尔蒙道，“经历过几个冬天？”
“You are a young man, Tyrion,” Mormont said. “How many winters have you seen?”
他耸耸肩。“八九个罢，我记不清了。”
He shrugged. “Eight, nine. I misremember.”
“而且都不长，对吧？”
“And all of them short.”
“您说得没错，大人。”他降生于严冬之际，据学士们说，那是特别酷寒的一次冬天，整整长达三年之久，然而提利昂最早的记忆却是春季。
“As you say, my lord.” He had been born in the dead of winter, a terrible cruel one that the maesters said had lasted near three years, but Tyrion’s earliest memories were of spring.
“我打小的时候，便听说接着长夏而来的会是更漫长的冬季。这次的夏天已经过了九年，提利昂，很快便要进入第十个年头。想想看这意味着什么罢。”
“When I was a boy, it was said that a long summer always meant a long winter to come. This summer has lasted nine years , Tyrion, and a tenth will soon be upon us. Think on that.”
“而我小时候呢，”提利昂应道，“我奶妈告诉我，倘若有朝一日，人们都能和睦相处，知礼向善，那么诸神便会让盛夏永无止尽。说不定是咱们表现得比意料中好，而传说中的永夏已经降临了哪。”他嘻嘻一笑。
“When I was a boy,” Tyrion replied, “my wet nurse told me that one day, if men were good, the gods would give the world a summer without ending. Perhaps we’ve been better than we thought, and the Great Summer is finally at hand.” He grinned.
守夜人军团总司令却没有开玩笑的心情。“大人，您不会蠢到相信这种事的。白昼已经渐渐缩短，这千真万确。伊蒙收到过学城寄来的信，与他的推论不谋而合。夏日将尽已是不容置疑的事实。”莫尔蒙伸手紧紧抓住提利昂。“你一定得教他们了解事态的严重性。我告诉你，大人，前所未有的黑暗时代即将来临。森林里各种怪兽出没，有冰原狼、长毛象和野牛一般大的雪熊，我还梦见过更可怕的东西。”
The Lord Commander did not seem amused. “You are not fool enough to believe that, my lord. Already the days grow shorter. There can be no mistake, Aemon has had letters from the Citadel, findings in accord with his own. The end of summer stares us in the face.” Mormont reached out and clutched Tyrion tightly by the hand. “You must make them understand. I tell you, my lord, the darkness is coming. There are wild things in the woods, direwolves and mammoths and snow bears the size of aurochs, and I have seen darker shapes in my dreams.”
“您梦见过。”提利昂重复，一边觉得自己需要再喝些烈酒。
“In your dreams,” Tyrion echoed, thinking how badly he needed another strong drink.
莫尔蒙没听出他话中带刺。“东海岸的渔夫见过在岸边走动的白鬼。”
Mormont was deaf to the edge in his voice. “The fisherfolk near Eastwatch have glimpsed white walkers on the shore.”
这次提利昂忍不住了。“兰尼斯港的渔夫还经常看到美人鱼呢。”
This time Tyrion could not hold his tongue. “The fisherfolk of Lannisport often glimpse merlings.”
“丹尼斯·梅利斯特写信来说山区蛮族正在南迁，成群结队地溜过影子塔，以前从没有过如此规模的迁徙。大人，他们是在逃跑啊……但是在逃避些什么呢？”莫尔蒙司令走到窗边，向外望进夜色。“兰尼斯特少爷，我这身老骨头还没有过如此寒彻心肺的感觉。我请求您，把我所说的话一字不漏地转告国王陛下。凛冬将至，当长夜降临，守夜人是惟一能保卫王国，抵挡黑暗势力自北方横扫的屏障。倘若我们没有万全准备，天知道下场会多凄惨。”
“Denys Mallister writes that the mountain people are moving south, slipping past the Shadow Tower in numbers greater than ever before. They are running, my lord … but running from what?” Lord Mormont moved to the window and stared out into the night. “These are old bones, Lannister, but they have never felt a chill like this. Tell the king what I say, I pray you. Winter is coming, and when the Long Night falls, only the Night’s Watch will stand between the realm and the darkness that sweeps from the north. The gods help us all if we are not ready.”
“倘若我今晚不睡觉，天知道下场会多凄惨。尤伦打定主意明早天一亮就动身。”提利昂起立，他已经喝得酩酊大醉，也听够了关于世界末日的预言。“莫尔蒙大人，感谢您的盛情款待。”
“The gods help me if I do not get some sleep tonight. Yoren is determined to ride at first light.” Tyrion got to his feet, sleepy from wine and tired of doom. “I thank you for all the courtesies you have done me, Lord Mormont.”
“告诉他们，提利昂，一定要告诉他们，想办法让他们相信。那就是你最好的感谢。”他吹声口哨，乌鸦便朝他飞去，停在他肩膀上。提利昂离开之时，莫尔蒙正微笑着从口袋里掏出谷粒喂它。
“Tell them, Tyrion. Tell them and make them believe. That is all the thanks I need.” He whistled, and his raven flew to him and perched on his shoulder. Mormont smiled and gave the bird some corn from his pocket, and that was how Tyrion left him.
门外寒气逼人。提利昂·兰尼斯特包裹在厚重的皮毛大衣里，边戴手套，边朝司令官堡垒外站岗的僵硬倒霉鬼点头致意。他迈开步伐，尽他所能地加快脚步，穿过庭院，朝自己位于国王塔的房间走去。靴子踏破寒夜的覆冰，积雪在脚下嘎吱作响，呼吸如旗帜般在眼前凝霜。他两手环胸，走得更快，一心祈祷莫里斯没忘记用火炉里的热砖头替他暖被子。
It was bitter cold outside. Bundled thickly in his furs, Tyrion Lannister pulled on his gloves and nodded to the poor frozen wretches standing sentry outside the Commander’s Keep. He set off across the yard for his own chambers in the King’s Tower, walking as briskly as his legs could manage. Patches of snow crunched beneath his feet as his boots broke the night’s crust, and his breath steamed before him like a banner. He shoved his hands into his armpits and walked faster, praying that Morrec had remembered to warm his bed with hot bricks from the fire.
位于国王塔后方的绝境长城在月光下粼粼发光，庞大而神秘。提利昂不由得驻足凝望，双腿则因酷寒和运动而疼痛不已。
Behind the King’s Tower, the Wall glimmered in the light of the moon, immense and mysterious. Tyrion stopped for a moment to look up at it. His legs ached of cold and haste.
突然，他心生怪异的狂念，决定再看看世界尽头一眼。这是他这辈子最后的机会罢，他心想，明天就要启程南归，而他实在想不出有何理由重回这冰封的不毛之地。国王塔近在眼前，提利昂却不由自主地绕过它，绕过垂手可得的暖意和温床，朝长城这广大的苍白冰壁走去。
Suddenly a strange madness took hold of him, a yearning to look once more off the end of the world. It would be his last chance, he thought; tomorrow he would ride south, and he could not imagine why he would ever want to return to this frozen desolation. The King’s Tower was before him, with its promise of warmth and a soft bed, yet Tyrion found himself walking past it, toward the vast pale palisade of the Wall.
墙南有座粗木横梁搭建的楼梯，深陷在冰层里，牢牢冻住。长长的楼梯蜿蜒曲折，如一记闪电，弯弯曲曲攀上城墙。黑衫弟兄曾向他保证这楼梯远比看起来坚固，但提利昂的脚痛得实在厉害，根本没法独立攀爬。于是他走往井边的铁笼子，爬了进去，然后用力拉了三下尾端系着传唤铃的绳索。
A wooden stair ascended the south face, anchored on huge rough-hewn beams sunk deep into the ice and frozen in place. Back and forth it switched, clawing its way upward as crooked as a bolt of lightning. The black brothers assured him that it was much stronger than it looked, but Tyrion’s legs were cramping too badly for him to even contemplate the ascent. He went instead to the iron cage beside the well, clambered inside, and yanked hard on the bell rope, three quick pulls.
他就这么靠着长城，站在条条铁栅里，漫无止尽地等待。到后来，提利昂不禁怀疑自己为何自讨苦吃。最后他终于决定忘记这偶发的奇想，打道回府去睡觉时，铁笼却猛地一晃，开始上升。
He had to wait what seemed an eternity, standing there inside the bars with the Wall to his back. Long enough for Tyrion to begin to wonder why he was doing this. He had just about decided to forget his sudden whim and go to bed when the cage gave a jerk and began to ascend.
他缓缓上升，起初颠簸不已，后来渐趋平稳。地面离提利昂脚底越来越远，铁笼不断摇晃，他紧握铁条，而即使隔着手套都能感觉金属的寒意。他注意到莫里斯已经在房里生起炉火，心中暗自赞许。总司令的塔楼卧室则一片漆黑，看来熊老脑筋比他迟钝多了。
He moved upward slowly, by fits and starts at first, then more smoothly. The ground fell away beneath him, the cage swung, and Tyrion wrapped his hands around the iron bars. He could feel the cold of the metal even through his gloves. Morrec had a fire burning in his room, he noted with approval, but the Lord Commander’s tower was dark. The Old Bear had more sense than he did, it seemed.
铁笼高过塔楼，继续向高处缓缓攀升。黑城堡就在他脚下，镂刻于月光中。居高临下，你才发现它那些没有窗户的堡垒，崩塌的围墙，遍布碎石的庭院有多么僵直、多么空洞。远处，他看到南边的国王大道上，距此半里格之遥的鼹鼠小村的灯火，以及此起彼落，自山间倾注而下，贯穿平原的冰冷溪流，水面闪烁，月光映照。除此之外，世界便是一片由饱受冷风摧残的丘陵，嶙峋危岩和缀着残雪的野地构成的无尽荒芜。
Then he was above the towers, still inching his way upward. Castle Black lay below him, etched in moonlight. You could see how stark and empty it was from up here; windowless keeps, crumbling walls, courtyards choked with broken stone. Farther off, he could see the lights of Mole’s Town, the little village half a league south along the kingsroad, and here and there the bright glitter of moonlight on water where icy streams descended from the mountain heights to cut across the plains. The rest of the world was a bleak emptiness of windswept hills and rocky fields spotted with snow.
这时他身后传来一个粗厚的声音，“他妈的，是那个矮子。”接着铁笼一阵猛烈颠簸，瞬间停止不动，悬挂在半空，缓缓地来回摇晃，绳索咯吱作响。
Finally a thick voice behind him said, “Seven hells, it’s the dwarf,” and the cage jerked to a sudden stop and hung there, swinging slowly back and forth, the ropes creaking.
“让他进来罢，天杀的。”铁笼开始朝长城平移，木头嘎吱作响，发出痛苦的呻吟。提利昂直等铁笼停止晃动方才打开闸门，跳到结冰的地面。一个体格魁梧的黑衣人正靠在绞盘上，另一个则戴着手套托住铁笼。他们用羊毛围巾裹住脸，所以只看得到眼睛。由于穿了好几层黑羊毛和皮革，看起来相当肥胖。“三更半夜的，你跑来这干啥？”站在绞盘边的人问。
“Bring him in, damn it.” There was a grunt and a loud groaning of wood as the cage slid sideways and then the Wall was beneath him. Tyrion waited until the swinging had stopped before he pushed open the cage door and hopped down onto the ice. A heavy figure in black was leaning on the winch, while a second held the cage with a gloved hand. Their faces were muffled in woolen scarves so only their eyes showed, and they were plump with layers of wool and leather, black on black. “And what will you be wanting, this time of night?” the one by the winch asked.
“来看最后一眼。”
“A last look.”
两人无奈地对视一眼。“小个子，爱怎么看随你。”另一人道，“只要别摔下去就成，不然熊老非把咱俩皮扒了不可。”起重机下有座木造小屋，当那个拉绞盘的人开门进去时，提利昂隐约看到里面传出火盆阴暗的光亮，感到些微的暖意，然后便只剩下他孤零零一个人。
The men exchanged sour glances. “Look all you want,” the other one said. “Just have a care you don’t fall off, little man. The Old Bear would have our hides.” A small wooden shack stood under the great crane, and Tyrion saw the dull glow of a brazier and felt a brief gust of warmth when the winch men opened the door and went back inside. And then he was alone.
冷得刺骨，风像急切的情人般撕扯他的衣服。长城比此地的国王大道还要宽敞，所以提利昂无须担心失足坠落，可地表的确太滑。黑衣弟兄们在通道上铺满了碎石，但长时间的踩踏早已磨平了地面，于是冰渐渐填满砂砾间的缝隙，吞噬了碎石。等到通道被再度磨平，又得重新铺上碎石。
It was bitingly cold up here, and the wind pulled at his clothes like an insistent lover. The top of the Wall was wider than the kingsroad often was, so Tyrion had no fear of falling, although the footing was slicker than he would have liked. The brothers spread crushed stone across the walkways, but the weight of countless footsteps would melt the Wall beneath, so the ice would seem to grow around the gravel, swallowing it, until the path was bare again and it was time to crush more stone.
好在眼前的情况，提利昂还不至于应付不过。他朝东西两边远望，看着长城如一条无始无终的白色大道自眼前延伸而出，两侧则是黑暗深渊。他决定朝西走，也说不出什么原因。于是他靠着北边，顺着看来才刚铺过碎石的通道，提步往那个方向走去。
Still, it was nothing that Tyrion could not manage. He looked off to the east and west, at the Wall stretching before him, a vast white road with no beginning and no end and a dark abyss on either side. West, he decided, for no special reason, and he began to walk that way, following the pathway nearest the north edge, where the gravel looked freshest.
暴露在外的双颊被冻得通红，双脚也早就在抗议，但他不加理会。狂风在他耳际怒吼，碎石在他脚下嘎吱作响，长城在他前方沿丘陵蜿蜒，有如白色蝴蝶结般渐渐升高，最后消失于西边的地平线。他走过一台高如城墙的庞大投石机，它的底座深深地陷入长城，投掷臂被拆下来维修，却忘了装回去，于是便像个坏掉的玩具般躺在那儿，半掩盖在冰层里。
His bare cheeks were ruddy with the cold, and his legs complained more loudly with every step, but Tyrion ignored them. The wind swirled around him, gravel crunched beneath his boots, while ahead the white ribbon followed the lines of the hills, rising higher and higher, until it was lost beyond the western horizon. He passed a massive catapult, as tall as a city wall, its base sunk deep into the Wall. The throwing arm had been taken off for repairs and then forgotten; it lay there like a broken toy, half-embedded in the ice.
从投石机的彼端传来一声不太清晰的盘问：“是谁？不许动！”
On the far side of the catapult, a muffled voice called out a challenge. “Who goes there? Halt!”
提利昂停下来。“琼恩，我要是不动，非冻死在这里不可。”他边说边看到一个毛茸茸的白影悄悄地朝他跑来，凑着他的毛皮衣物嗅个不休。“哈啰，白灵。”
Tyrion stopped. “If I halt too long I’ll freeze in place, Jon,” he said as a shaggy pale shape slid toward him silently and sniffed at his furs. “Hello, Ghost.”
琼恩·雪诺朝他走来。他穿了一层又一层的毛皮和皮革，模样更为魁梧高壮，斗篷的兜帽拉下来遮住了脸。“兰尼斯特，”他边说边拉开盖住嘴巴的围巾。“想不到会在这里碰见你。”他带了一支比他人还高的铁头重矛，佩剑装上皮套，悬在腰际。他的胸前则挂着一支发亮的黑色镶银号角。
Jon Snow moved closer. He looked bigger and heavier in his layers of fur and leather, the hood of his cloak pulled down over his face. “Lannister,” he said, yanking loose the scarf to uncover his mouth. “This is the last place I would have expected to see you.” He carried a heavy spear tipped in iron, taller than he was, and a sword hung at his side in a leather sheath. Across his chest was a gleaming black warhorn, banded with silver.
“我也想不到在这里竟还会被人发现。”提利昂坦承，“我突然有个念头，如果我摸摸白灵，他会把我的手给咬掉么？”
“This is the last place I would have expected to be seen,” Tyrion admitted. “I was captured by a whim. If I touch Ghost, will he chew my hand off?”
“如果我在场就不会。”琼恩向他保证。
“Not with me here,” Jon promised.
提利昂搔搔白狼的耳背。它用那双红眼睛无动于衷地看着他。这只野兽已经长到他胸口这么高了。再过一年，提利昂阴沉地想，它搞不好会长得比他自己还高。“你今晚在这干啥？”他问，“莫非想把命根子给冻掉……”
Tyrion scratched the white wolf behind the ears. The red eyes watched him impassively. The beast came up as high as his chest now. Another year, and Tyrion had the gloomy feeling he’d be looking up at him. “What are you doing up here tonight?” he asked. “Besides freezing your manhood off …”
“我抽到值夜班的签。”琼恩说，“也不是第一次了。好心的艾里沙爵士要守卫长对我‘多加关照’。他大概以为只要让我半夜无休，我就会在晨训时打瞌睡。但到目前为止我让他失望了。”
“I have drawn night guard,” Jon said. “Again. Ser Alliser has kindly arranged for the watch commander to take a special interest in me. He seems to think that if they keep me awake half the night, I’ll fall asleep during morning drill. So far I have disappointed him.”
提利昂嘿嘿一笑：“那白灵会变魔术了没？”
Tyrion grinned. “And has Ghost learned to juggle yet?”
“还没。”琼恩微笑道，“但葛兰今早上已经可以和霍德一较高下，而且派普也不再像以前那样老是掉剑了。”
“No,” said Jon, smiling, “but Grenn held his own against Halder this morning, and Pyp is no longer dropping his sword quite so often as he did.”
“派普？”
“Pyp?”
“他本名是派普尔，就是那个生了双招风耳的矮个男生。他看到我和葛兰在练习，便跑过来请我也教教他。索恩连握剑的正确姿势都没教他。”他转身看看北方。“我有一里的长城要巡逻，一起走走？”
“Pypar is his real name. The small boy with the large ears. He saw me working with Grenn and asked for help. Thorne had never even shown him the proper way to grip a sword.” He turned to look north. “I have a mile of Wall to guard. Will you walk with me?”
“你走慢点就可以。”提利昂道。
“If you walk slowly,” Tyrion said.
“守卫长只交代我必须一直走动，血液才不会冻住，倒没说走多快。”
“The watch commander tells me I must walk, to keep my blood from freezing, but he never said how fast.”
于是他们结伴同行，白灵则像道白影般跟在琼恩身旁。“我明天一早离开。”提利昂道。
They walked, with Ghost pacing along beside Jon like a white shadow. “I leave on the morrow,” Tyrion said.
“我知道。”琼恩的语气听来怪异地感伤。
“I know.” Jon sounded strangely sad.
“我打算在临冬城稍事停留。所以你若有什么口信要我转达……”
“I plan to stop at Winterfell on the way south. If there is any message that you would like me to deliver …”
“跟罗柏说我以后会当上守夜人的司令官，保护他的安全，所以他不妨跟女孩子们学学针线，然后叫密肯把他的佩剑熔掉，拿去做马蹄铁吧。”
“Tell Robb that I’m going to command the Night’s Watch and keep him safe, so he might as well take up needlework with the girls and have Mikken melt down his sword for horseshoes.”
“你兄弟块头大我那么多，”提利昂笑道，“我拒绝传达可能会惹来杀身之祸的口信。”
“Your brother is bigger than me,” Tyrion said with a laugh. “I decline to deliver any message that might get me killed.”
“瑞肯一定会问你我何时才能回家。想办法跟他解释我去了什么地方。告诉他我不在的时候，我所有的东西都归他管，他听了一定会很高兴的。”
“Rickon will ask when I’m coming home. Try to explain where I’ve gone, if you can. Tell him he can have all my things while I’m away, he’ll like that.”
今天有事相求的人还真多，提利昂·兰尼斯特心想。“其实，你可以写封家信。”
People seemed to be asking a great deal of him today, Tyrion Lannister thought. “You could put all this in a letter, you know.”
“瑞肯还不识字。至于布兰嘛……”他突然停下来。“我不知该捎什么口信给他。提利昂，帮帮他罢。”
“Rickon can’t read yet. Bran …” He stopped suddenly. “I don’t know what message to send to Bran. Help him, Tyrion.”
“我能帮上什么？我不是学士，没法治疗他的病痛。我也没有魔咒可以让他双腿复原。”
“What help could I give him? I am no maester, to ease his pain. I have no spells to give him back his legs.”
“你在我最需要的时候帮了我一把。”琼恩·雪诺道。
“You gave me help when I needed it,” Jon Snow said.
“我什么也没给你，”提利昂说，“只是几句废话。”
“I gave you nothing,” Tyrion said. “Words.”
“那就对布兰也讲几句罢。”
“Then give your words to Bran too.”
“你这分明是叫瘸子教残废跳舞，”提利昂说，“无论教得再好，只会惨不忍睹。但我也懂得手足之情，雪诺大人。我会尽我所能帮助布兰。”
“You’re asking a lame man to teach a cripple how to dance,” Tyrion said. “However sincere the lesson, the result is likely to be grotesque. Still, I know what it is to love a brother, Lord Snow. I will give Bran whatever small help is in my power.”
“谢谢你，兰尼斯特大人。”他脱下手套，伸出手，“好朋友。”
“Thank you, my lord of Lannister.” He pulled off his glove and offered his bare hand. “Friend.”
提利昂发现自己竟意外地大受感动。“我的亲戚多半是些王八蛋，”他咧嘴笑道，“而你是第一个跟我做朋友的人。”他用牙齿咬住手套脱下来，然后握住雪诺的手，肉贴着肉。男孩握得坚定而有力。
Tyrion found himself oddly touched. “Most of my kin are bastards,” he said with a wry smile, “but you’re the first I’ve had to friend.” He pulled a glove off with his teeth and clasped Snow by the hand, flesh against flesh. The boy’s grip was firm and strong.
等琼恩·雪诺重新戴上手套，他突然转身走到北面冰冷的低矮城垛边。城墙以外高度骤降，只剩一片暗黝寒荒。提利昂跟了过去，两人便这么肩并肩站在世界的尽头。
When he had donned his glove again, Jon Snow turned abruptly and walked to the low, icy northern parapet. Beyond him the Wall fell away sharply; beyond him there was only the darkness and the wild. Tyrion followed him, and side by side they stood upon the edge of the world.
守夜人军团绝不让森林延伸到长城以北半里之内，原本生在这范围内的铁树、哨兵树和橡树，早在几百年前便被砍伐干净，辟出一块开阔的空地，如此一来，任何敌人都不可能在不被发现的情况下前来进犯。但提利昂听说，这几十年来，野生的树林已经在三座堡垒之间的某些要塞处重新长了回来，灰绿的哨兵树和惨白的鱼梁木已经根深蒂固地落脚于城墙阴影之下。好在黑城堡柴火用量惊人，黑衫弟兄们才得以用斧头把树林排拒在外。
The Night’s Watch permitted the forest to come no closer than half a mile of the north face of the Wall. The thickets of ironwood and sentinel and oak that had once grown there had been harvested centuries ago, to create a broad swath of open ground through which no enemy could hope to pass unseen. Tyrion had heard that elsewhere along the Wall, between the three fortresses, the wildwood had come creeping back over the decades, that there were places where grey-green sentinels and pale white weirwoods had taken root in the shadow of the Wall itself, but Castle Black had a prodigious appetite for firewood, and here the forest was still kept at bay by the axes of the black brothers.
虽然如此，森林却也离他们不远。站在这里，提利昂可以看到阴暗的树木笼罩着空地的边缘，如同又一道与城墙平行的暗夜长城。即便月光，也无法穿透那亘古的盘根错节，所以鲜少有人前去伐木。游骑兵说那里的树长得奇高无比，看起来像在沉思冥想，厌恶活人。难怪守夜人称其为鬼影森林。
It was never far, though. From up here Tyrion could see it, the dark trees looming beyond the stretch of open ground, like a second wall built parallel to the first, a wall of night. Few axes had ever swung in that black wood, where even the moonlight could not penetrate the ancient tangle of root and thorn and grasping limb. Out there the trees grew huge, and the rangers said they seemed to brood and knew not men. It was small wonder the Night’s Watch named it the haunted forest.
提利昂站着远望，四周寂静黑暗，全无灯火光影，劲风疾袭，冷如刀割。他突然觉得自己仿佛开始相信关于人类公敌、寒夜异鬼的种种传说，他那些古灵精怪的玩笑也不再轻薄。
As he stood there and looked at all that darkness with no fires burning anywhere, with the wind blowing and the cold like a spear in his guts, Tyrion Lannister felt as though he could almost believe the talk of the Others, the enemy in the night. His jokes of grumkins and snarks no longer seemed quite so droll.
“我叔叔就在那儿。”琼恩·雪诺拄着长矛，望向无尽黑暗，轻声道。“他们派我上来的第一个晚上，我以为班扬叔叔当晚便会回来，我会第一个见着他，吹响报讯的号角。只是他当夜没有回来，一直没有，而我夜夜都在等他。”
“My uncle is out there,” Jon Snow said softly, leaning on his spear as he stared off into the darkness. “The first night they sent me up here, I thought, Uncle Benjen will ride back tonight, and I’ll see him first and blow the horn. He never came, though. Not that night and not any night.”
“多给他点时间罢。”提利昂说。
“Give him time,” Tyrion said.
遥遥北疆传来一声狼嚎，跟着一只接一只的狼加入长吼。白灵侧头倾听。“如果他不回来，”琼恩·雪诺向他保证。“我就和白灵一起去找他。”他把手放在冰原狼的头上。
Far off to the north, a wolf began to howl. Another voice picked up the call, then another. Ghost cocked his head and listened. “If he doesn’t come back,” Jon Snow promised, “Ghost and I will go find him.” He put his hand on the direwolf’s head.
“我相信你。”提利昂说，然而他心里想的却是：在那之后，派谁去找你呢？他不禁打了个冷颤。
“I believe you,” Tyrion said, but what he thought was, And who will go find you? He shivered.
第二十三章 艾莉亚
*ARYA
那天父亲大人又是很晚才来用饭，艾莉亚看得出他又跟朝廷闹意见了。当奈德·史塔克大跨步走进“小厅”的时候，晚餐的第一道菜，那锅浓稠的南瓜甜汤，早已被撤下桌去。他们把这儿叫做“小厅”，用以区别国王那足以容纳千人的大厅。话虽如此，这里却也不小，这是一间有着高耸圆顶的狭长房间，长凳上坐得下两百号人。
H er father had been fighting with the council again. Arya could see it on his face when he came to table, late again, as he had been so often. The first course, a thick sweet soup made with pumpkins, had already been taken away when Ned Stark strode into the Small Hall. They called it that to set it apart from the Great Hall, where the king could feast a thousand, but it was a long room with a high vaulted ceiling and bench space for two hundred at its trestle tables.
“大人。”父亲进来时，乔里开口说。他站起来，其余的侍卫也立即起身，他们个个穿着厚重的灰羊毛滚白缎边的新斗篷，褶层上绣了一只银手，标示他们是首相的贴身护卫。由于总共才五十人，因此长凳显得空荡荡的。
“My lord,” Jory said when Father entered. He rose to his feet, and the rest of the guard rose with him. Each man wore a new cloak, heavy grey wool with a white satin border. A hand of beaten silver clutched the woolen folds of each cloak and marked their wearers as men of the Hand’s household guard. There were only fifty of them, so most of the benches were empty.
“坐下罢。”艾德·史塔克道，“我很高兴这城里就你们还有点常识，至少知道先开动。”他示意大家继续用餐，侍者端出一盘盘用蒜头和草药包裹的烤排骨。
“Be seated,” Eddard Stark said. “I see you have started without me. I am pleased to know there are still some men of sense in this city.” He signaled for the meal to resume. The servants began bringing out platters of ribs, roasted in a crust of garlic and herbs.
“老爷，外面人人都在传说要举办一场比武大会。”乔里坐回位子。“听说全国各地的骑士都会前来，为您的荣誉而战，庆祝您走马上任。”
“The talk in the yard is we shall have a tourney, my lord,” Jory said as he resumed his seat. “They say that knights will come from all over the realm to joust and feast in honor of your appointment as Hand of the King.”
艾莉亚看得出父亲对此不甚高兴。“他们怎么不说这是我最不愿见到的事？”
Arya could see that her father was not very happy about that. “Do they also say this is the last thing in the world I would have wished?”
珊莎的眼睛睁得跟盘子一样大。“比武大会。”她吸了口气。她坐在茉丹修女和珍妮·普尔中间，在不引起父亲注意的范围内，尽可能离艾莉亚远远的。“父亲大人，我们可以去吗？”
Sansa’s eyes had grown wide as the plates. “A tourney,” she breathed. She was seated between Septa Mordane and Jeyne Poole, as far from Arya as she could get without drawing a reproach from Father. “Will we be permitted to go, Father?”
“珊莎，你知道我对这件事的看法。这档蠢事分明是劳勃自己的主意，我帮他筹办也就算了，还得假装受宠若惊，但那不代表我必须带女儿去参加。”
“You know my feelings, Sansa. It seems I must arrange Robert’s games and pretend to be honored for his sake. That does not mean I must subject my daughters to this folly.”
“哎哟，拜托嘛。”珊莎说，“人家好想去。”
“Oh, please,” Sansa said. “I want to see.”
茉丹修女开口：“老爷，届时弥赛公主也会出席，而她年纪比珊莎小姐还小。遇到这种盛事，宫廷里的仕女们都应该出席。更何况这届比武大会以您之名举办的，您的家人若不到场，可能有些不妥。”
Septa Mordane spoke up. “Princess Myrcella will be there, my lord, and her younger than Lady Sansa. All the ladies of the court will be expected at a grand event like this, and as the tourney is in your honor, it would look queer if your family did not attend.”
父亲神色痛苦。“我想也是。也罢，珊莎，我就帮你安排个席位。”他看看艾莉亚。“帮你们两个都弄个席位。”
Father looked pained. “I suppose so. Very well, I shall arrange a place for you, Sansa.” He saw Arya. “For both of you.”
“我才没兴趣参加什么无聊的比武会呢。”艾莉亚说。她知道乔佛里王子到时候一定也在场，而她恨死乔佛里王子了。
“I don’t care about their stupid tourney,” Arya said. She knew Prince Joffrey would be there, and she hated Prince Joffrey.
珊莎昂头道：“这会是一场盛况空前的庆祝。本来也没人希望你参加。”
Sansa lifted her head. “It will be a splendid event. You shan’t be wanted.”
父亲听了满脸怒容。“够了，珊莎。再说下去，小心我改变主意。我已经被你们俩没完没了的争吵给烦死了。再怎么说你们都是亲姐妹，我希望你们像姐妹一样相亲相爱，知道了么？”
Anger flashed across Father’s face. “Enough , Sansa. More of that and you will change my mind. I am weary unto death of this endless war you two are fighting. You are sisters. I expect you to behave like sisters, is that understood?”
珊莎咬着嘴唇点点头，艾莉亚低头不快地盯着眼前的餐盘，感觉到泪水刺痛眼睛。她愤怒地抹掉眼泪，决心不要哭。
Sansa bit her lip and nodded. Arya lowered her face to stare sullenly at her plate. She could feel tears stinging her eyes. She rubbed them away angrily, determined not to cry.
四周只剩下刀叉碰触的声音。“很抱歉，”父亲对全桌的人说，“今晚我没什么胃口。”说完他便走出小厅。
The only sound was the clatter of knives and forks. “Pray excuse me,” her father announced to the table. “I find I have small appetite tonight.” He walked from the hall.
他离开之后，珊莎立刻兴奋地和珍妮·普尔窃窃私语起来。坐在长桌彼端的乔里有说有笑，胡伦也开始大谈马经。“我说啊，你那匹战马实在不是比武的最佳选择，这和平时骑完全是两码事，懂吗？完全两码事。”这套说词其他人很早就听过，戴斯蒙、杰克斯和胡伦的儿子哈尔温齐声要他闭嘴，波瑟则叫人多来点葡萄酒。
After he was gone, Sansa exchanged excited whispers with Jeyne Poole. Down the table Jory laughed at a joke, and Hullen started in about horseflesh. “Your warhorse, now, he may not be the best one for the joust. Not the same thing, oh, no, not the same at all.” The men had heard it all before; Desmond, Jacks, and Hullen’s son Harwin shouted him down together, and Porther called for more wine.
偏偏没人跟艾莉亚说话。其实她也不在乎，她还挺喜欢这种情形。若非大人们不准，她宁愿躲在卧房里吃。遇到父亲和国王、某某爵爷或某某使节共进晚餐的时候，她就可以得逞。不过多半，她跟父亲和姐姐三人在首相书房里用餐。每当这种时候，艾莉亚最想念哥哥弟弟。她想取笑布兰，想跟小瑞肯玩闹，想让罗柏含笑看着自己。她想要琼恩弄乱她的头发，叫她“我的小妹”，然后和她异口同声说出一句话。如今她只有珊莎为伴，但除非父亲逼迫，否则珊莎一句话都不和她讲。
No one talked to Arya. She didn’t care. She liked it that way. She would have eaten her meals alone in her bedchamber if they let her. Sometimes they did, when Father had to dine with the king or some lord or the envoys from this place or that place. The rest of the time, they ate in his solar, just him and her and Sansa. That was when Arya missed her brothers most. She wanted to tease Bran and play with baby Rickon and have Robb smile at her. She wanted Jon to muss up her hair and call her “little sister” and finish her sentences with her. But all of them were gone. She had no one left but Sansa, and Sansa wouldn’t even talk to her unless Father made her.
从前在临冬城，他们常在城堡大厅用餐。父亲总是说，做领主的必须要和手下一同进食，如此才能留住他们的心。“你不但要了解自己的部下，”有次她听父亲这么对罗柏说，“还必须让他们也了解你。别想叫你的手下为一个他们所不认识的人卖命。”在临冬城，他总会在自己的餐桌上特别留出一个座位，每晚请来不同的人。如果请来维扬·普尔，谈的便是财务状况、粮食补给和仆人们的事。下次若换成密肯，父亲便会听他分析盔甲宝剑，解说炼钢打铁时风炉的热度。有时候则是三句不离养马的胡伦，管理图书室的柴尔修士，或是乔里，罗德利克爵士，甚至是最会说故事的老奶妈。
Back at Winterfell, they had eaten in the Great Hall almost half the time. Her father used to say that a lord needed to eat with his men, if he hoped to keep them. “Know the men who follow you,” she heard him tell Robb once, “and let them know you. Don’t ask your men to die for a stranger.” At Winterfell, he always had an extra seat set at his own table, and every day a different man would be asked to join him. One night it would be Vayon Poole, and the talk would be coppers and bread stores and servants. The next time it would be Mikken, and her father would listen to him go on about armor and swords and how hot a forge should be and the best way to temper steel. Another day it might be Hullen with his endless horse talk, or Septon Chayle from the library, or Jory, or Ser Rodrik, or even Old Nan with her stories.
艾莉亚最喜欢坐在父亲桌边听他们说话，她也喜欢听坐在下方长凳上的人们说话：坚毅粗鲁的自由骑手，彬彬有礼的成年骑士，口无遮拦的年轻侍从，饱经风霜的沙场老兵。以前她常朝他们丢雪球，或帮他们从厨房里夹带馅饼。他们的妻子会烤饼给她吃，她则替她们的宝宝起名字，和她们的孩子玩“美女与怪兽”、比赛寻宝、做城堡游戏。胖汤姆老爱叫她“捣蛋鬼艾莉亚”，因为他说她老是跑来跑去。她喜欢这个绰号远胜过“马脸艾莉亚”。
Arya had loved nothing better than to sit at her father’s table and listen to them talk. She had loved listening to the men on the benches too; to freeriders tough as leather, courtly knights and bold young squires, grizzled old men-at-arms. She used to throw snowballs at them and help them steal pies from the kitchen. Their wives gave her scones and she invented names for their babies and played monsters-and-maidens and hide-the-treasure and come-into-my-castle with their children. Fat Tom used to call her “Arya Underfoot,” because he said that was where she always was. She’d liked that a lot better than “Arya Horseface.”
只可惜那都是发生在临冬城的事，仿佛是另一个世界，现在一切都变了。说来今天是他们抵达君临以来头一次和下人一同用餐，艾莉亚却恨透了这种安排。她恨透了其他人说话的声音，恨透了他们开怀大笑的方式，以及他们所说的故事。他们曾经是她的朋友，与他们为伍曾让她很有安全感，如今她知道这全是假的。他们袖手旁观，让王后杀了淑女，这本来已经够糟，后来又任“猎狗”逮着了米凯。珍妮·普尔告诉艾莉亚，他把米凯大卸八块，人们只好把尸体用袋子装起来交还屠夫，只可怜那杀猪匠起初还以为里面装的是刚杀的猪仔。没有人对此质疑或拔刀相助，什么都没有，不管是最会吹嘘自己勇敢的哈尔温，还是立志要当骑士的埃林，或是身为侍卫队长的乔里，就连父亲也没有出面阻止。
Only that was Winterfell, a world away, and now everything was changed. This was the first time they had supped with the men since arriving in King’s Landing. Arya hated it. She hated the sounds of their voices now, the way they laughed, the stories they told. They’d been her friends, she’d felt safe around them, but now she knew that was a lie. They’d let the queen kill Lady, that was horrible enough, but then the Hound found Mycah. Jeyne Poole had told Arya that he’d cut him up in so many pieces that they’d given him back to the butcher in a bag, and at first the poor man had thought it was a pig they’d slaughtered. And no one had raised a voice or drawn a blade or anything , not Harwin who always talked so bold, or Alyn who was going to be a knight, or Jory who was captain of the guard. Not even her father.
“他是我朋友呀。”艾莉亚对着餐盘低语，声音低到无人听见。她的排骨躺在盘里，动也没动，已经冷掉了，餐盘和肉块间凝了一层油。艾莉亚越看越恶心，便推开椅子站起来。
“He was my friend,” Arya whispered into her plate, so low that no one could hear. Her ribs sat there untouched, grown cold now, a thin film of grease congealing beneath them on the plate. Arya looked at them and felt ill. She pushed away from the table.
“等等，小姐，你要去哪里啊？”茉丹修女问。
“Pray, where do you think you are going, young lady?” Septa Mordane asked.
“我不饿。”艾莉亚想起要顾及礼节。“请问，我可以先告退吗？”她生硬地背诵道。
“I’m not hungry.” Arya found it an effort to remember her courtesies. “May I be excused, please?” she recited stiffly.
“还不行，”修女说，“你的东西几乎都没吃，请你坐下来先把盘里的食物清干净。”
“You may not,” the septa said. “You have scarcely touched your food. You will sit down and clean your plate.”
“要清你自己清！”趁人们还没反应过来，艾莉亚便往门边奔去。其他人哈哈大笑，茉丹修女则跟在后面大声叫唤，声音越来越高。
“You clean it!” Before anyone could stop her, Arya bolted for the door as the men laughed and Septa Mordane called loudly after her, her voice rising higher and higher.
胖汤姆守在岗位上，负责把守通往首相塔的门。眼见艾莉亚朝自己冲来，又听见后面修女的喊叫，他眨了眨眼。“哟呼，小娃娃，别乱跑呀。”他才刚开口，准备伸手阻拦，艾莉亚便已穿过他胯下，跑上迂回的高塔楼梯。她的脚步重重地踩在石阶上，胖汤姆则气喘吁吁地跟在后面。
Fat Tom was at his post, guarding the door to the Tower of the Hand. He blinked when he saw Arya rushing toward him and heard the septa’s shouts. “Here now, little one, hold on,” he started to say, reaching, but Arya slid between his legs and then she was running up the winding tower steps, her feet hammering on the stone while Fat Tom huffed and puffed behind her.
诺大的君临城，艾莉亚惟一喜欢的地方就是自己的卧室，尤其是那扇用深色橡木做成，镶有黑铁环的厚重大门。她只要把门一摔，放下沉重的门闩，便谁也别想进来。不论茉丹修女、胖汤姆、珊莎、乔里还是死猎狗，他们都进不来，通通都进不来！这会儿她就把门一摔。
Her bedchamber was the only place that Arya liked in all of King’s Landing, and the thing she liked best about it was the door, a massive slab of dark oak with black iron bands. When she slammed that door and dropped the heavy crossbar, nobody could get into her room, not Septa Mordane or Fat Tom or Sansa or Jory or the Hound, nobody! She slammed it now.
等门闩放好，艾莉亚终于觉得自己可以尽情地哭了。
When the bar was down, Arya finally felt safe enough to cry.
她走到窗边坐下，一边吸着鼻涕，一边痛恨着所有的人，尤其恨她自己。一切都是她的错，所有的事都因她而起。珊莎这么说，珍妮也这么说。
She went to the window seat and sat there, sniffling, hating them all, and herself most of all. It was all her fault, everything bad that had happened. Sansa said so, and Jeyne too.
胖汤姆正在敲门。“艾莉亚小妹，怎么啦？”他叫道，“你在里面吗？”
Fat Tom was knocking on her door. “Arya girl, what’s wrong?” he called out. “You in there?”
“不在！”她吼回去。敲门声停了，片刻之后她听见他走远的声音。胖汤姆向来很好骗。
“No!” she shouted. The knocking stopped. A moment later she heard him going away. Fat Tom was always easy to fool.
艾莉亚拖出放在床脚的箱子，她跪下来，掀开盖子，双手并用，开始把她的衣服往外丢，把满手丝质、绸缎、天鹅绒、羊毛织的衣物扔到地板上。东西藏在箱底，艾莉亚轻轻地捧起它，抽出剑鞘。
Arya went to the chest at the foot of her bed. She knelt, opened the lid, and began pulling her clothes out with both hands, grabbing handfuls of silk and satin and velvet and wool and tossing them on the floor. It was there at the bottom of the chest, where she’d hidden it. Arya lifted it out almost tenderly and drew the slender blade from its sheath.
缝衣针。
Needle.
她想起米凯，顿时泪水盈眶。是她的错，她的错，她的错。如果她没要他跟自己练剑……
She thought of Mycah again and her eyes filled with tears. Her fault, her fault, her fault. If she had never asked him to play at swords with her …
门上响起更大的敲门声。“艾莉亚·史塔克，立刻把门给我打开，你听见了没有？”
There was a pounding at her door, louder than before. “Arya Stark, you open this door at once, do you hear me?”
艾莉亚倏地转身，手中紧握‘缝衣针’。“你不要进来！”她出声警告，一边对着空气疯狂挥砍。
Arya spun around, with Needle in her hand. “You better not come in here!” she warned. She slashed at the air savagely.
“我会让首相知道这件事！”茉丹修女怒喝。
“The Hand will hear of this!” Septa Mordane raged.
“我不管。”艾莉亚尖叫，“走开。”
“I don’t care,” Arya screamed. “Go away.”
“小姐，我跟你保证，你一定会为自己粗野的行为而后悔。”艾莉亚在门边侧耳倾听，直到听见修女渐行渐远的脚步声。
“You will rue this insolent behavior, young lady, I promise you that.” Arya listened at the door until she heard the sound of the septa’s receding footsteps.
她又回到窗边，手里握着‘缝衣针’，朝下方的庭院望去。要是她能像布兰一样爬上爬下就好了，她心想，那么她就能爬出窗户，爬下高塔，逃离这个烂地方，远离珊莎、茉丹修女和乔佛里王子，远离所有的人。顺便从厨房偷点吃的，带上“缝衣针”，上好的靴子，外加一件保暖的斗篷。她可以在三叉戟河下游的森林里找到娜梅莉亚，然后她们就可以一起回临冬城，或跑到长城去找琼恩了。她发现自己好希望琼恩此刻在自己身边，那样她就不会觉得这么孤单了。
She went back to the window, Needle in hand, and looked down into the courtyard below. If only she could climb like Bran, she thought; she would go out the window and down the tower, run away from this horrible place, away from Sansa and Septa Mordane and Prince Joffrey, from all of them. Steal some food from the kitchens, take Needle and her good boots and a warm cloak. She could find Nymeria in the wild woods below the Trident, and together they’d return to Winterfell, or run to Jon on the Wall. She found herself wishing that Jon was here with her now. Then maybe she wouldn’t feel so alone.
轻轻的敲门声将艾莉亚从她的脱逃梦里拉回现实。“艾莉亚，”父亲唤道，“开门罢，我们需要谈谈。”
A soft knock at the door behind her turned Arya away from the window and her dreams of escape. “Arya,” her father’s voice called out. “Open the door. We need to talk.”
艾莉亚穿过房间，举起门闩。只见父亲独自一人站在门外，那样子与其说是生气，毋宁说是悲伤。这却让艾莉亚更难过。“我可以进来吗？”艾莉亚点点头，羞愧地垂下视线。父亲关上门。“那把剑是谁的？”
Arya crossed the room and lifted the crossbar. Father was alone. He seemed more sad than angry. That made Arya feel even worse. “May I come in?” Arya nodded, then dropped her eyes, ashamed. Father closed the door. “Whose sword is that?”
“我的。”艾莉亚忘了‘缝衣针’还握在自己手里。
“Mine.” Arya had almost forgotten Needle, in her hand.
“给我。”
“Give it to me.”
艾莉亚心不甘情不愿地交出剑，心里嘀咕不知还有没有机会再握起它。父亲就着光反复翻转，审视剑锋的两面，然后用拇指测量锐利程度。“这是杀手用的剑，”他说，“但我似乎认得铸剑人的记号，这是密肯打的。”
Reluctantly Arya surrendered her sword, wondering if she would ever hold it again. Her father turned it in the light, examining both sides of the blade. He tested the point with his thumb. “A bravo’s blade,” he said. “Yet it seems to me that I know this maker’s mark. This is Mikken’s work.”
艾莉亚知道骗不过他，只好低下头。
Arya could not lie to him. She lowered her eyes.
艾德·史塔克公爵叹气道：“我九岁大的女儿从我自家的武器炉中拿到武器，我却毫不知情。首相的职责是管理七大王国，结果我连自己家里都管不好。艾莉亚，你怎么弄到这把剑的？从哪儿弄来的？”
Lord Eddard Stark sighed. “My nine-year-old daughter is being armed from my own forge, and I know nothing of it. The Hand of the King is expected to rule the Seven Kingdoms, yet it seems I cannot even rule my own household. How is it that you come to own a sword, Arya? Where did you get this?”
艾莉亚咬着嘴唇，不发一语。她绝不出卖琼恩，即使是对父亲大人也一样。
Arya chewed her lip and said nothing. She would not betray Jon, not even to their father.
过了半晌，父亲说：“其实，你说不说都没差。”他低下头，沉重地看着手中的剑。“这可不是小孩子玩具，女孩子家尤其不该碰。要是茉丹修女知道你在玩剑，她会怎么说？”
After a while, Father said, “I don’t suppose it matters, truly.” He looked down gravely at the sword in his hands. “This is no toy for children, least of all for a girl. What would Septa Mordane say if she knew you were playing with swords?”
“我才不是玩剑呢。”艾莉亚坚持，“而且我恨茉丹修女。”
“I wasn’t playing,” Arya insisted. “I hate Septa Mordane.”
“够了，”父亲的语气严厉而坚定。“修女只是尽她的职责本分，天知道你让这可怜女人吃了多少苦头。你母亲和我请她教导你成为淑女，这根本就是件不可能完成的任务。”
“That’s enough.” Her father’s voice was curt and hard. “The septa is doing no more than is her duty, though gods know you have made it a struggle for the poor woman. Your mother and I have charged her with the impossible task of making you a lady.”
“我又不想变成淑女！”艾莉亚怒道。
“I don’t want to be a lady!” Arya flared.
“我真应该现在就用膝盖把这玩意儿折断，终止这场闹剧。”
“I ought to snap this toy across my knee here and now, and put an end to this nonsense.”
“‘缝衣针’不会断的。”艾莉亚不服气地说，然而她知道自己的口气颇为心虚。
“Needle wouldn’t break,” Arya said defiantly, but her voice betrayed her words.
“它还有名字？”父亲叹道，“啊，艾莉亚，我的孩子，你有股特别的野性，你的祖父称之为‘奔狼之血’。莱安娜有那么一点，我哥哥布兰登则更多，结果两人都英年早逝。”艾莉亚从他话音里听出了哀伤，他鲜少谈及自己的父亲和兄妹，他们都在她出生前就过世了。“当初若是你祖父答应，莱安娜大概也会舞刀弄剑。有时候看到你，我就想起她，你甚至长得都跟她有几分神似。”
“It has a name, does it?” Her father sighed. “Ah, Arya. You have a wildness in you, child. ‘The wolf blood,’ my father used to call it. Lyanna had a touch of it, and my brother Brandon more than a touch. It brought them both to an early grave.” Arya heard sadness in his voice; he did not often speak of his father, or of the brother and sister who had died before she was born. “Lyanna might have carried a sword, if my lord father had allowed it. You remind me of her sometimes. You even look like her.”
“莱安娜是个大美人。”艾莉亚错愕地道。每个人都这么说，但从没有人拿她来形容艾莉亚。
“Lyanna was beautiful,” Arya said, startled. Everybody said so. It was not a thing that was ever said of Arya.
“可不是吗？”艾德·史塔克同意，“她既美丽又任性，结果红颜薄命。”他举起剑，隔在两人之间。“艾莉亚，你要这……‘缝衣针’做什么？你想拿来对付谁？你姐姐？还是茉丹修女？你知道剑道的第一步是什么？”
“She was,” Eddard Stark agreed, “beautiful, and willful, and dead before her time.” He lifted the sword, held it out between them. “Arya, what did you think to do with this … Needle? Who did you hope to skewer? Your sister? Septa Mordane? Do you know the first thing about sword fighting?”
她惟一能想到的只是琼恩教过她的东西。“用尖的那端去刺敌人。”她脱口而出。
All she could think of was the lesson Jon had given her. “Stick them with the pointy end,” she blurted out.
父亲忍俊不禁。“我想这的确是剑术的精髓。”
Her father snorted back laughter. “That is the essence of it, I suppose.”
艾莉亚拚命想解释，好让他了解。“我想好好学，可是……”她眼里溢满泪水。“我要米凯陪我练。”所有的悲恸这时一齐涌上心头，她颤抖着别过头去。“是我找他的。”她哭着说，“都是我的错，是我……”
Arya desperately wanted to explain, to make him see. “I was trying to learn, but …” Her eyes filled with tears. “I asked Mycah to practice with me.” The grief came on her all at once. She turned away, shaking. “I asked him,” she cried. “It was my fault, it was me …”
突然间，父亲的双臂抱住了她，她转过头，埋在他胸口啜泣，他则温柔地拥着她。“别这样，我亲爱的孩子。”他低语道，“为你的朋友哀悼吧，但不要自责。屠夫小弟不是你害的，该为这桩血案负责的是猎狗和他残酷的女主人。”
Suddenly her father’s arms were around her. He held her gently as she turned to him and sobbed against his chest. “No, sweet one,” he murmured. “Grieve for your friend, but never blame yourself. You did not kill the butcher’s boy. That murder lies at the Hound’s door, him and the cruel woman he serves.”
“我恨他们。”艾莉亚一边吸鼻子，一边红着脸说出心里话。“我恨猎狗、恨王后、恨国王还有乔佛里王子。我恨死他们了。乔佛里骗人，事情根本就不是他讲的那样。我也恨珊莎，她明明就记得，她故意说谎话好让乔佛里喜欢她。”
“I hate them,” Arya confided, red-faced, sniffling. “The Hound and the queen and the king and Prince Joffrey. I hate all of them. Joffrey lied , it wasn’t the way he said. I hate Sansa too. She did remember, she just lied so Joffrey would like her.”
“谁没有说过谎呢，”父亲道，“难道你以为我相信娜梅莉亚真的会跑掉？”
“We all lie,” her father said. “Or did you truly think I’d believe that Nymeria ran off?”
艾莉亚心虚地脸红了。“乔里答应我不说出去的。”
Arya blushed guiltily. “Jory promised not to tell.”
“乔里很守信用。”父亲微笑道，“有些事不用别人说我也知道，连瞎子都看得出来小狼不会自动离开你。”
“Jory kept his word,” her father said with a smile. “There are some things I do not need to be told. Even a blind man could see that wolf would never have left you willingly.”
“我们丢了好多石头才赶走她。”她一脸悲苦地说，“我叫她走，放她自由，说我不要她了。她该去找其他狼玩，我们听见好多狼在叫，乔里说森林里猎物很多，她可以去追捕野鹿，可她偏偏要跟着我们，最后我们才不得不丢石头赶她。我打中她两次，她边哀嚎边看着我，我觉得好羞耻，但这样做是正确的对不对？不然王后会杀她的。”
“We had to throw rocks,” she said miserably. “I told her to run, to go be free, that I didn’t want her anymore. There were other wolves for her to play with, we heard them howling, and Jory said the woods were full of game, so she’d have deer to hunt. Only she kept following, and finally we had to throw rocks. I hit her twice. She whined and looked at me and I felt so ’shamed, but it was right, wasn’t it? The queen would have killed her.”
“你做得没错，”父亲说，“有时谎言也能……不失荣誉。”方才他趋身拥抱艾莉亚时把“缝衣针”放在一边，这会儿他又拾起短剑，踱至窗边。他在那里驻足片刻，视线穿过广场，望向远方。等他回过头来，眼里满是思绪。他在窗边坐下，把“缝衣针”平放膝上。“艾莉亚，坐下来。有些事我要试着跟你解释清楚。”
“It was right,” her father said. “And even the lie was … not without honor.” He’d put Needle aside when he went to Arya to embrace her. Now he took the blade up again and walked to the window, where he stood for a moment, looking out across the courtyard. When he turned back, his eyes were thoughtful. He seated himself on the window seat, Needle across his lap. “Arya, sit down. I need to try and explain some things to you.”
她不安地在床边坐下。“你年纪还太小，本不该让你分担我所有的忧虑。”他告诉她，“但你是临冬城史塔克家族的一份子，你也知道我们的族语。”
She perched anxiously on the edge of her bed. “You are too young to be burdened with all my cares,” he told her, “but you are also a Stark of Winterfell. You know our words.”
“凛冬将至。”艾莉亚轻声说。
“Winter is coming,” Arya whispered.
“是的，艰苦而残酷的时代即将来临，”父亲说，“我们在三叉戟河上尝到了这种滋味，孩子，布兰坠楼时也是。你生于漫长的盛夏时节，我亲爱的好孩子，至今还未经历其他季节，然而现在冬天真的要来了。艾莉亚，不论何时何地，我要你牢牢记住我们的家徽。”
“The hard cruel times,” her father said. “We tasted them on the Trident, child, and when Bran fell. You were born in the long summer, sweet one, you’ve never known anything else, but now the winter is truly coming. Remember the sigil of our House, Arya.”
“冰原狼。”她边说边想起娜梅莉亚，不由得缩起膝盖、靠着胸膛，害怕了起来。
“The direwolf,” she said, thinking of Nymeria. She hugged her knees against her chest, suddenly afraid.
“孩子，让我来说说关于狼的轶事。当大雪降下，冷风吹起，独行狼死，群聚狼生。夏天时可以争吵，但一到冬天，我们便必须保卫彼此，相互温暖，共享力量。所以假如你真要恨，艾莉亚，就恨那些会真正伤害我们的人。茉丹修女是个好女人，而珊莎……珊莎她再怎么说也是你姐姐。你们俩或许有天壤之别，但体内终究流着相同的血液。你需要她，她也同样需要你……而我则需要你们两个，老天保佑。”
“Let me tell you something about wolves, child. When the snows fall and the white winds blow, the lone wolf dies, but the pack survives. Summer is the time for squabbles. In winter, we must protect one another, keep each other warm, share our strengths. So if you must hate, Arya, hate those who would truly do us harm. Septa Mordane is a good woman, and Sansa … Sansa is your sister. You may be as different as the sun and the moon, but the same blood flows through both your hearts. You need her, as she needs you … and I need both of you, gods help me.”
他的话听起来好疲倦，听得艾莉亚好心酸。“我不恨珊莎，”她告诉他，“不是真的恨她。”这起码是半句实话。
He sounded so tired that it made Arya sad. “I don’t hate Sansa,” she told him. “Not truly.” It was only half a lie.
“我并非有意吓你，然而我也不想骗你。孩子，我们来到了一个黑暗危险的地方，这里不是临冬城。有太多敌人想置我们于死地，我们不能自相残杀。你在老家时的任性胡为、种种撒气、乱跑和不听话……都是夏天里小孩子的把戏。此时此地，冬天马上就要来到，断不能与从前相提并论。如今，该是你长大的时候了。”
“I do not mean to frighten you, but neither will I lie to you. We have come to a dark dangerous place, child. This is not Winterfell. We have enemies who mean us ill. We cannot fight a war among ourselves. This willfulness of yours, the running off, the angry words, the disobedience … at home, these were only the summer games of a child. Here and now, with winter soon upon us, that is a different matter. It is time to begin growing up.”
“我会的。”艾莉亚发誓。她从没有像此刻这么爱他。“我也会变强壮，变得跟罗柏一样强壮。”
“I will,” Arya vowed. She had never loved him so much as she did in that instant. “I can be strong too. I can be as strong as Robb.”
他把“缝衣针”递给她，剑柄在前。“拿去罢”。
He held Needle out to her, hilt first. “Here.”
她惊讶地盯着剑，半晌都不敢碰，生怕自己一伸手剑又被拿走。只听父亲说：“拿啊，这是你的了。”她这才伸手接过。
She looked at the sword with wonder in her eyes. For a moment she was afraid to touch it, afraid that if she reached for it it would be snatched away again, but then her father said, “Go on, it’s yours,” and she took it in her hand.
“我可以留着吗？”她问。“真的吗？”
“I can keep it?” she said. “For true?”
“真的。”他微笑着说。“我要是把它给拿走了，只怕没两个星期就会在你枕头下找到流星锤罢。算啦，无论你多生气，别拿剑刺你姐姐就好。”
“For true.” He smiled. “If I took it away, no doubt I’d find a morningstar hidden under your pillow within the fortnight. Try not to stab your sister, whatever the provocation.”
“我不会，我保证不会。”艾莉亚紧紧地把“缝衣针”抱在胸前，目送父亲离去。
“I won’t. I promise.” Arya clutched Needle tightly to her chest as her father took his leave.
隔天吃早饭时，她向茉丹修女道歉，并请求原谅。修女狐疑地看着她，但父亲点了点头。
The next morning, as they broke their fast, she apologized to Septa Mordane and asked for her pardon. The septa peered at her suspiciously, but Father nodded.
三天后的中午，父亲的管家维扬·普尔把艾莉亚带去小厅。餐桌业已拆除，长凳也推至墙边，小厅里空荡荡的。突然，有个陌生的声音说：“小子，你迟到了。”然后一个身形清癯，生着鹰钩大鼻的光头男子从阴影里走出来，手里握着一对细细的木剑。“从明天起你正午就必须到。”他说话带着口音，像是自由贸易城邦的腔调，可能是布拉佛斯，或是密尔。
Three days later, at midday, her father’s steward Vayon Poole sent Arya to the Small Hall. The trestle tables had been dismantled and the benches shoved against the walls. The hall seemed empty, until an unfamiliar voice said, “You are late, boy.” A slight man with a bald head and a great beak of a nose stepped out of the shadows, holding a pair of slender wooden swords. “Tomorrow you will be here at midday,” He had an accent, the lilt of the Free Cities, Braavos perhaps, or Myr.
“你是谁？”艾莉亚问。
“Who are you?” Arya asked.
“我是你的舞蹈老师。”他丢给她一柄木剑。她伸手去接，却没有够着，它咔啦一声掉落在地。“从明天起我一丢你就要接住。现在捡起来。”
“I am your dancing master.” He tossed her one of the wooden blades. She grabbed for it, missed, and heard it clatter to the floor. “Tomorrow you will catch it. Now pick it up.”
那不只是根棍子，而真的是一把木剑，有剑柄、护手，还有装饰剑柄的圆球。艾莉亚拾起来，紧张兮兮地双手交握在前。这把剑比看起来要重，比“缝衣针”重多了。
It was not just a stick, but a true wooden sword complete with grip and guard and pommel. Arya picked it up and clutched it nervously with both hands, holding it out in front of her. It was heavier than it looked, much heavier than Needle.
光头男子龇牙咧嘴道：“不对不对，小子。这不是双手挥的巨剑。你只准用单手握”。
The bald man clicked his teeth together. “That is not the way, boy. This is not a greatsword that is needing two hands to swing it. You will take the blade in one hand.”
“太重了”。艾莉亚说。
“It’s too heavy,” Arya said.
“这样才能锻炼你的手臂肌肉，还有整体的协调性。里面空心部分灌满了铅，就是这样。你要单手持剑”。
“It is heavy as it needs to be to make you strong, and for the balancing. A hollow inside is filled with lead, just so. One hand now is all that is needing.”
艾莉亚把握剑的右手放下，在裤子上擦了擦掌心的汗，换用左手持剑。而他对此似乎相当满意。“左手最好。左右颠倒，你的敌人会很不习惯。但你的站姿错了，不要正对着我，身体侧一点，对，就是这样。你瘦得跟长矛一样，知道吗？这也挺好，因为目标缩小了。现在让我看看你是怎么握的。”他靠过来，盯着她的手，扳开手指，重新调整。“对，就是这样。别太用力，对，但要灵活，优雅。”
Arya took her right hand off the grip and wiped her sweaty palm on her pants. She held the sword in her left hand. He seemed to approve. “The left is good. All is reversed, it will make your enemies more awkward. Now you are standing wrong. Turn your body sideface, yes, so. You are skinny as the shaft of a spear, do you know. That is good too, the target is smaller. Now the grip. Let me see.” He moved closer and peered at her hand, prying her fingers apart, rearranging them. “Just so, yes. Do not squeeze it so tight, no, the grip must be deft, delicate.”
“剑掉了怎么办？”艾莉亚问。
“What if I drop it?” Arya said.
“剑必须和你的手合为一体。”光头男子告诉她，“你的手会掉吗？当然不会。西利欧·佛瑞尔在布拉佛斯海王手下干了九年的首席剑士，他懂得这些东西。听他的话，小子。”
“The steel must be part of your arm,” the bald man told her. “Can you drop part of your arm? No. Nine years Syrio Forel was first sword to the Sealord of Braavos, he knows these things. Listen to him, boy.”
这已经是他第三次叫她“小子”了。“我是女生。”艾莉亚抗议。
It was the third time he had called her “boy.” “I’m a girl,” Arya objected.
“管他男的女的，”西利欧·佛瑞尔说，“你是一把剑，这样就够了。”他又龇牙咧嘴道，“好，就是这样，保持这个握姿。记住，你握的不是战斧，你握的是——”
“Boy, girl,” Syrio Forel said. “You are a sword, that is all.” He clicked his teeth together. “Just so, that is the grip. You are not holding a battle-axe, you are holding a—”
“——缝衣针。”艾莉亚凶狠地替他说完。
“—needle,” Arya finished for him, fiercely.
“就是这样。现在我们开始跳舞。记住，孩子，我们学的不是维斯特洛的钢铁之舞，骑士之舞，挥来砍去，不是的。这是杀手之舞，水之舞，行动敏捷，出其不意。人都是水做的，你知道吗？当你刺中人体，水流外泄，人就会死。”他向后退开一步，举起木剑。“现在你来打我试试。”
“Just so. Now we will begin the dance. Remember, child, this is not the iron dance of Westeros we are learning, the knight’s dance, hacking and hammering, no. This is the bravo’s dance, the water dance, swift and sudden. All men are made of water, do you know this? When you pierce them, the water leaks out and they die.” He took a step backward, raised his own wooden blade. “Now you will try to strike me.”
于是艾莉亚尝试攻击他。她一共试了四个小时，直到最后每寸肌肉都酸痛不已，而西利欧·佛瑞尔只是一边龇牙咧嘴，一边纠正个不停。
Arya tried to strike him. She tried for four hours, until every muscle in her body was sore and aching, while Syrio Forel clicked his teeth together and told her what to do.
到了第二天，好戏才刚刚上演。
The next day their real work began.
第二十四章 丹妮莉丝
*DAENERYS
“这就是多斯拉克海。”乔拉·莫尔蒙爵士说着拉住缰绳，停在她身旁，两人一同站在山脊之巅。
“T he Dothraki sea,” Ser Jorah Mormont said as he reined to a halt beside her on the top of the ridge. Beneath them, the plain stretched out immense and empty, a vast flat expanse that reached to the distant horizon and beyond. It was a sea, Dany thought. Past here, there were no hills, no mountains, no trees nor cities nor roads, only the endless grasses, the tall blades rippling like waves when the winds blew. “It’s so green,” she said.
宽广空旷的平原在他们下方延展开来，平坦辽阔直至极目尽头。这的确像一片汪洋啊，丹妮心想。从此以往，丘陵山峦不再，连树林、城市和道路也没了踪影，只有一望无际的草原，风起云涌，长长的草叶摆动一如波浪。“好绿呀。”她说。
“Here and now,” Ser Jorah agreed. “You ought to see it when it blooms, all dark red flowers from horizon to horizon, like a sea of blood. Come the dry season, and the world turns the color of old bronze. And this is only hranna , child. There are a hundred kinds of grass out there, grasses as yellow as lemon and as dark as indigo, blue grasses and orange grasses and grasses like rainbows. Down in the Shadow Lands beyond Asshai, they say there are oceans of ghost grass, taller than a man on horseback with stalks as pale as milkglass. It murders all other grass and glows in the dark with the spirits of the damned. The Dothraki claim that someday ghost grass will cover the entire world, and then all life will end.”
“现在正是绿的时候，”乔拉爵士同意，“你该瞧瞧花开时的景象，满山遍野都是暗红的花，活像一片血海。等旱季一到，整个世界又变成青铜色。这还只是赫拉纳草的颜色，孩子，不包括其他几百种草，有的黄得像柠檬，有的暗得如靛紫，还有蓝色和橙色的，以及彩虹色斑的草。在亚夏彼方的阴影之地，据说还有一片鬼草海，那草长得比安坐马上的人还高，茎秆白得像白璃。这种草会杀死其余的草，然后在暗处藉由被诅咒的灵魂发光。多斯拉克人认为有朝一日鬼草会占据全世界，到那时，一切的生命便将结束。”
That thought gave Dany the shivers. “I don’t want to talk about that now,” she said. “It’s so beautiful here, I don’t want to think about everything dying.”
丹妮听了不禁颤抖。“别说了，”她说，“这里好漂亮，我不想谈跟死亡有关的事。”
“As you will, Khaleesi,” Ser Jorah said respectfully.
“如您所愿，卡丽熙。”乔拉爵士恭敬地说。
She heard the sound of voices and turned to look behind her. She and Mormont had outdistanced the rest of their party, and now the others were climbing the ridge below them. Her handmaid Irri and the young archers of her khas were fluid as centaurs, but Viserys still struggled with the short stirrups and the flat saddle. Her brother was miserable out here. He ought never have come. Magister Illyrio had urged him to wait in Pentos, had offered him the hospitality of his manse, but Viserys would have none of it. He would stay with Drogo until the debt had been paid, until he had the crown he had been promised. “And if he tries to cheat me, he will learn to his sorrow what it means to wake the dragon,” Viserys had vowed, laying a hand on his borrowed sword. Illyrio had blinked at that and wished him good fortune.
她听见响动，便回头看去。她和莫尔蒙先前已把队伍远远抛在后面，这会儿其他人正陆续登上山岗。女仆伊丽和她“卡斯”①里的年轻弓箭手们行动矫健得像半人马，但韦赛里斯还很不适应短马镫和平马鞍。哥哥在这里十分不快活，他根本就不应该来的。伊利里欧总督原本力劝他留在潘托斯，甚至愿意慷慨地提供自己的一栋宅院给他住，但韦赛里斯偏不听。他要跟着卓戈，直到对方履行约定，给他那顶王冠为止。“他要是敢骗我，我就叫他知道唤醒睡龙之怒是什么滋味。”韦赛里斯把手放在那把借来的剑上，如此发誓。伊利里欧听了眨眨眼，祝福他一切顺遂。
Dany realized that she did not want to listen to any of her brother’s complaints right now. The day was too perfect. The sky was a deep blue, and high above them a hunting hawk circled. The grass sea swayed and sighed with each breath of wind, the air was warm on her face, and Dany felt at peace. She would not let Viserys spoil it.
丹妮此刻一点也不想关心哥哥的满腹牢骚。这是个完美的好日子，一只猎鹰高高在上，盘旋于深蓝天际。草海波荡，随着阵阵徐风轻叹，朝她的脸送来丝丝暖意，丹妮只觉心情平静祥和。她绝不让韦赛里斯破坏自己的好兴致。
“Wait here,” Dany told Ser Jorah. “Tell them all to stay. Tell them I command it.”
“停下来，”丹妮告诉乔拉爵士：“叫他们全部停下来，告诉他们这是我的命令。”
The knight smiled. Ser Jorah was not a handsome man. He had a neck and shoulders like a bull, and coarse black hair covered his arms and chest so thickly that there was none left for his head. Yet his smiles gave Dany comfort. “You are learning to talk like a queen, Daenerys.”
骑士微微一笑。乔拉爵士算不上俊美，生着公牛般的脖子和肩膀，手臂和胸膛上长满粗厚的黑毛，头上反而寸草不生。但他的微笑总能让丹妮宽心。“丹妮莉丝，你说话越来越有公主的味道了。”
“Not a queen,” said Dany. “A khaleesi.” She wheeled her horse about and galloped down the ridge alone.
“不是公主，”丹妮说，“是卡丽熙。”说完她调转马头，独自奔下山岗。
The descent was steep and rocky, but Dany rode fearlessly, and the joy and the danger of it were a song in her heart. All her life Viserys had told her she was a princess, but not until she rode her silver had Daenerys Targaryen ever felt like one.
坡路陡峭，遍地岩石，但丹妮毫不畏惧，驰骋的快意和危险使她心花怒放。韦赛里斯从小就口口声声说她是个公主，但直到她骑上小银马，丹妮莉丝·坦格利安才真正觉得此话成了真。
At first it had not come easy. The khalasar had broken camp the morning after her wedding, moving east toward Vaes Dothrak, and by the third day Dany thought she was going to die. Saddle sores opened on her bottom, hideous and bloody. Her thighs were chafed raw, her hands blistered from the reins, the muscles of her legs and back so wracked with pain that she could scarcely sit. By the time dusk fell, her handmaids would need to help her down from her mount.
起初一切都不顺利，卡拉萨在婚礼翌日清晨便拔营动身，朝东边的维斯·多斯拉克出发。才到第三天，丹妮就觉得自己半死不活。连日坐在马鞍上，导致她的臀部伤痕累累，血流不止。大腿久经摩擦，脱皮得厉害，双手则被缰绳磨起了水泡，两脚和背部的肌肉痛得她连坐都坐不直。天黑之后，她需要靠女仆帮忙方能下马。
Even the nights brought no relief. Khal Drogo ignored her when they rode, even as he had ignored her during their wedding, and spent his evenings drinking with his warriors and bloodriders, racing his prize horses, watching women dance and men die. Dany had no place in these parts of his life. She was left to sup alone, or with Ser Jorah and her brother, and afterward to cry herself to sleep. Yet every night, some time before the dawn, Drogo would come to her tent and wake her in the dark, to ride her as relentlessly as he rode his stallion. He always took her from behind, Dothraki fashion, for which Dany was grateful; that way her lord husband could not see the tears that wet her face, and she could use her pillow to muffle her cries of pain. When he was done, he would close his eyes and begin to snore softly and Dany would lie beside him, her body bruised and sore, hurting too much for sleep.
夜里她也不得安宁。白天骑马时卓戈卡奥和结婚当天一样，对她不理不睬，，晚上则和手下战士与血盟卫们喝酒赛马，观赏女人跳舞，男人拼杀。在他生活的这个部分，丹妮毫无地位可言。她往往独自用餐，顶多和乔拉爵士及哥哥相伴，然后哭着入睡。但当每晚天将破晓，卓戈会到她的帐篷，在黑暗中叫醒她，然后无情地骑她，一如骑他的战马。依照多斯拉克习俗，他总是从后面上，为此丹妮非常感激，因为这样一来，夫君便不会见她泪流满面的模样，她也可以用枕头来遮掩自己痛苦的喊叫。完事之后，他两眼一闭，便轻声打起呼来，丹妮则浑身是伤地躺在旁边，痛得难以成眠。
Day followed day, and night followed night, until Dany knew she could not endure a moment longer. She would kill herself rather than go on, she decided one night …
日复一日，夜复一夜，直到丹妮清楚地知道自己一刻也无法再忍受下去。某天晚上，她决定宁可自杀，也不愿继续苟且偷生……
Yet when she slept that night, she dreamt the dragon dream again. Viserys was not in it this time. There was only her and the dragon. Its scales were black as night, wet and slick with blood. Her blood, Dany sensed. Its eyes were pools of molten magma, and when it opened its mouth, the flame came roaring out in a hot jet. She could hear it singing to her. She opened her arms to the fire, embraced it, let it swallow her whole, let it cleanse her and temper her and scour her clean. She could feel her flesh sear and blacken and slough away, could feel her blood boil and turn to steam, and yet there was no pain. She felt strong and new and fierce.
然而就在那天夜里，当她睡觉的时候，却又做了那个关于龙的梦。这次没有韦赛里斯，只有她和巨龙。它的鳞片如暗夜般墨黑，上面血迹湿滑。那是她的血，丹妮发觉。它的眼睛是两个熔岩火池，它张开口，烈焰从中激射而出。它在朝自己唱歌啊，于是她伸开双臂，拥抱火焰，让它将自己完全吞噬，涤净她，锻炼她。她感到自己的肌肉焦灼发黑，坏死脱皮，感到自己的血液沸腾蒸发，却毫无痛楚，反而觉得强壮健实，如获新生。
And the next day, strangely, she did not seem to hurt quite so much. It was as if the gods had heard her and taken pity. Even her handmaids noticed the change. “Khaleesi,” Jhiqui said, “what is wrong? Are you sick?”
奇怪的是，隔天她似乎痛得不那么厉害了，好像天上诸神听到了她的哀求，怜悯起她的不幸。就连她的贴身女仆也感到诧异。“卡丽熙，”姬琪说，“怎么回事？您不舒服吗？”
“I was,” she answered, standing over the dragon’s eggs that Illyrio had given her when she wed. She touched one, the largest of the three, running her hand lightly over the shell. Black-and-scarlet , she thought, like the dragon in my dream . The stone felt strangely warm beneath her fingers … or was she still dreaming? She pulled her hand back nervously.
“没事。”她答道。随后她来到伊利里欧在婚礼上送给她的龙蛋旁边，伸手摸摸其中最大的一颗，手指轻轻地滑过蛋壳。既黑且红，她想，和我梦中的龙一样。石头在她指下变得异样地温暖……这是她的错觉吗？她不安地抽回手。
From that hour onward, each day was easier than the one before it. Her legs grew stronger; her blisters burst and her hands grew callused; her soft thighs toughened, supple as leather.
从那一刻起，一天比一天顺利。她的双腿强壮了起来，水泡破了，手也长出老茧，她柔软的大腿变得结实，像皮革般弯曲自如。
The khal had commanded the handmaid Irri to teach Dany to ride in the Dothraki fashion, but it was the filly who was her real teacher. The horse seemed to know her moods, as if they shared a single mind. With every passing day, Dany felt surer in her seat. The Dothraki were a hard and unsentimental people, and it was not their custom to name their animals, so Dany thought of her only as the silver. She had never loved anything so much.
卡奥命令女仆伊丽教导丹妮多斯拉克马术，但小银马才是她真正的老师。小银马似乎知悉她的心情，仿佛心有灵犀。随着日子过去，丹妮骑在马上越来越自如。多斯拉克人是个严酷无情的民族，按他们的习俗从不为动物取名字，所以丹妮只把它当作自己的小银马。虽然她从没有这么爱过一样东西。
As the riding became less an ordeal, Dany began to notice the beauties of the land around her. She rode at the head of the khalasar with Drogo and his bloodriders, so she came to each country fresh and unspoiled. Behind them the great horde might tear the earth and muddy the rivers and send up clouds of choking dust, but the fields ahead of them were always green and verdant.
当骑马不再是种折磨，丹妮开始注意到身边这片土地的美。她跟卓戈和他的血盟卫一起骑在卡拉萨最前面，所以眼前的一切都是充满生机、未经滋扰。紧跟在后的大队人马会践踏土地，把河水弄得浑浊不堪，扬起呛人灰尘，但出现在他们面前的永远是如茵绿野。
They crossed the rolling hills of Norvos, past terraced farms and small villages where the townsfolk watched anxiously from atop white stucco walls. They forded three wide placid rivers and a fourth that was swift and narrow and treacherous, camped beside a high blue waterfall, skirted the tumbled ruins of a vast dead city where ghosts were said to moan among blackened marble columns. They raced down Valyrian roads a thousand years old and straight as a Dothraki arrow. For half a moon, they rode through the Forest of Qohor, where the leaves made a golden canopy high above them, and the trunks of the trees were as wide as city gates. There were great elk in that wood, and spotted tigers, and lemurs with silver fur and huge purple eyes, but all fled before the approach of the khalasar and Dany got no glimpse of them.
他们越过高低起伏的诺佛斯丘陵，行经梯田和村庄，居民在灰泥砌成的墙上不安地看着他们。他们涉过三条宽广平静的河流，第四条则是一道狭窄湍急，河床险恶的江川，在一座高耸的蓝色瀑布旁扎营，随后绕过一座广大死城的断垣残壁，相传鬼魂仍哭嚎于焦黑的大理石柱间。他们在与多斯拉克弓箭一样笔直的瓦雷利亚千年古道上奔驰。花了足足半个月，才穿过金叶高盖头顶，树干宽如城门的科霍尔森林。森林里栖息着大麋鹿和花斑虎，还有生着银白毛皮和紫色大眼的狐猴，但只要卡拉萨一出现，它们便纷纷四散奔逃，结果丹妮什么也没瞧仔细。
By then her agony was a fading memory. She still ached after a long day’s riding, yet somehow the pain had a sweetness to it now, and each morning she came willingly to her saddle, eager to know what wonders waited for her in the lands ahead. She began to find pleasure even in her nights, and if she still cried out when Drogo took her, it was not always in pain.
此时她先前的伤痛已经成了回忆。长途跋涉之后她仍旧酸疼，却有种苦中带甜的意蕴。每天清晨她都跃跃欲试地跳上马鞍，迫不及待想见识更多奇观。她甚至也开始在夜里寻求欢愉，于是当卓戈占有她时，她虽然还是会叫出声，却不总是因为痛苦。
At the bottom of the ridge, the grasses rose around her, tall and supple. Dany slowed to a trot and rode out onto the plain, losing herself in the green, blessedly alone. In the khalasar she was never alone. Khal Drogo came to her only after the sun went down, but her handmaids fed her and bathed her and slept by the door of her tent, Drogo’s bloodriders and the men of her khas were never far, and her brother was an unwelcome shadow, day and night. Dany could hear him on the top of the ridge, his voice shrill with anger as he shouted at Ser Jorah. She rode on, submerging herself deeper in the Dothraki sea.
山岗下，又高又软的草把她包围。丹妮减缓速度，驱策小马跑入平原，让自己愉快地淹没在绿浪之中。在卡拉萨里她无法独处，虽然卓戈卡奥入夜之后才会来找她，但她的女仆会为她张罗餐点，帮她沐浴，睡在她帐门外。卓戈的血盟卫，以及她自己的卡斯部众，也总是离她不远，而哥哥不论日夜都是个讨厌的阴影。此刻，丹妮又听见他在山脊上对乔拉爵士大吼，尖锐的声音里透着怒意。她决定不加理会，继续向前骑去，沉浸在多斯拉克海底。
The green swallowed her up. The air was rich with the scents of earth and grass, mixed with the smell of horseflesh and Dany’s sweat and the oil in her hair. Dothraki smells. They seemed to belong here. Dany breathed it all in, laughing. She had a sudden urge to feel the ground beneath her, to curl her toes in that thick black soil. Swinging down from her saddle, she let the silver graze while she pulled off her high boots.
绿浪将她完全吞没，空气里充满了青草和泥土的芬芳，混杂着马臊味、汗味，以及她发油的气息。多斯拉克的气息。它们才是这里土生土长的主人，丹妮开心地笑了，深深地呼吸着这一切。她突然有股冲动，只想踩踩脚下的土地，在厚实的黑土壤里动动脚趾。于是她翻身下马，任银马去吃草，然后脱下脚上长靴。
Viserys came upon her as sudden as a summer storm, his horse rearing beneath him as he reined up too hard. “You dare!” he screamed at her. “You give commands to me? To me?” He vaulted off the horse, stumbling as he landed. His face was flushed as he struggled back to his feet. He grabbed her, shook her. “Have you forgotten who you are? Look at you. Look at you!”
韦赛里斯像一阵夏季暴风般突然冲到她身边，死命扯住缰绳，马痛得前脚高举。“你好大的胆子！”他朝她尖叫，“你竟敢命令我？命令我？”他自马背一跃而下，着地时摔了一跤。他满脸通红，挣扎着站起来，然后一把抓住她，猛力乱摇。“你别忘了你是谁？也不瞧瞧自己，瞧你现在什么德行！”
Dany did not need to look. She was barefoot, with oiled hair, wearing Dothraki riding leathers and a painted vest given her as a bride gift. She looked as though she belonged here. Viserys was soiled and stained in city silks and ringmail.
丹妮不用瞧便知，她赤着双脚，涂了发油，身上穿的是作结婚礼物的多斯拉克皮衣和彩绘背心。她看起来就像属于这里的人，反观韦赛里斯，穿着城里人的丝衣和环甲，浑身脏兮兮。
He was still screaming. “You do not command the dragon. Do you understand? I am the Lord of the Seven Kingdoms, I will not hear orders from some horselord’s slut, do you hear me?” His hand went under her vest, his fingers digging painfully into her breast. “Do you hear me?”
他尖叫个没完。“不准你对真龙之子颐指气使，懂不懂？我可是七国之君，你这马王的小贱货没资格命令我，你听见了没有？”他的手伸进她的背心，手指用力地掐住她的胸乳。“你听见了没有？”
Dany shoved him away, hard.
丹妮用力地推开他。
Viserys stared at her, his lilac eyes incredulous. She had never defied him. Never fought back. Rage twisted his features. He would hurt her now, and badly, she knew that.
韦赛里斯瞪着她，淡紫色的眸子里充满了难以置信。她从来没有顶撞过他，从来没有反抗过他。他气得五官扭曲。她心里很清楚，这下他会好好折磨她了。
Crack .
啪。
The whip made a sound like thunder. The coil took Viserys around the throat and yanked him backward. He went sprawling in the grass, stunned and choking. The Dothraki riders hooted at him as he struggled to free himself. The one with the whip, young Jhogo, rasped a question. Dany did not understand his words, but by then Irri was there, and Ser Jorah, and the rest of her khas . “Jhogo asks if you would have him dead, Khaleesi,” Irri said.
鞭子发出暴雷般的声响，卷住韦赛里斯喉咙往后猛拉。他震惊无比地仆倒在草丛里，无法呼吸。众位多斯拉克骑手看着他拚命挣脱束缚，朝他发出嘘声。出鞭的是年轻的乔戈，他厉声喝问了一句。丹妮听不懂，好在这时伊丽、乔拉爵士，以及她其他的卡斯成员都已赶到。“卡丽熙，乔戈问您是否要他死。”伊丽道。
“No,” Dany replied. “No.”
“不，”丹妮回答，“不要。”
Jhogo understood that. One of the others barked out a comment, and the Dothraki laughed. Irri told her, “Quaro thinks you should take an ear to teach him respect.”
这话乔戈听得懂。有人喊了一句，其他多斯拉克人纷纷大笑。伊丽告诉她：“魁洛认为您应该割他一只耳朵，给他一个教训。”
Her brother was on his knees, his fingers digging under the leather coils, crying incoherently, struggling for breath. The whip was tight around his windpipe.
哥哥跪在地上，手指抠住皮鞭，呼吸困难，发出难以分辨的嘶喊。鞭子紧紧勒住他的咽喉。
“Tell them I do not wish him harmed,” Dany said.
“跟他们说我不希望他受伤害。”丹妮说。
Irri repeated her words in Dothraki. Jhogo gave a pull on the whip, yanking Viserys around like a puppet on a string. He went sprawling again, freed from the leather embrace, a thin line of blood under his chin where the whip had cut deep.
伊丽用多斯拉克语重复了一遍。乔戈鞭子一抽，韦赛里斯便像丝线拉扯的木偶般再度仆倒在地，但总算解除了束缚。他脸颊下面有一道又深又细的血痕。
“I warned him what would happen, my lady,” Ser Jorah Mormont said. “I told him to stay on the ridge, as you commanded.”
“公主殿下，我警告过他别这样，”乔拉·莫尔蒙爵士道，“我告诉他照您的指示待在山岗。”
“I know you did,” Dany replied, watching Viserys. He lay on the ground, sucking in air noisily, red-faced and sobbing. He was a pitiful thing. He had always been a pitiful thing. Why had she never seen that before? There was a hollow place inside her where her fear had been.
“我知道。”丹妮边看着韦赛里斯边回答。他躺在地上，大声吸气，满脸通红，抽抽噎噎，十足的可怜虫模样。他一直都是条可怜虫，为何她到现在才发觉？她心里的恐惧，顿时化为乌有。
“Take his horse,” Dany commanded Ser Jorah. Viserys gaped at her. He could not believe what he was hearing; nor could Dany quite believe what she was saying. Yet the words came. “Let my brother walk behind us back to the khalasar.” Among the Dothraki, the man who does not ride was no man at all, the lowest of the low, without honor or pride. “Let everyone see him as he is.”
“把他的马带走。”她命令乔拉爵士。韦赛里斯张大嘴巴看着她，不敢相信他所听到的话，就连丹妮自己也不太相信她正说的话语。她道：“让我哥哥跟在我们后面，走路回卡拉萨罢。”对多斯拉克人来说，不骑马的人根本就不配当人，地位最为低贱，毫无荣誉与自尊可言。“让大家都看看他究竟是什么样的人。”
“No!” Viserys screamed. He turned to Ser Jorah, pleading in the Common Tongue with words the horsemen would not understand. “Hit her, Mormont. Hurt her. Your king commands it. Kill these Dothraki dogs and teach her.”
“不要！”韦赛里斯尖叫。他转向乔拉爵士，用其他人听不懂的通用语苦苦哀求。“莫尔蒙，帮我打她，你的国王命令你干掉她。把这些多斯拉克走狗给我杀了，教训教训她。”
The exile knight looked from Dany to her brother; she barefoot, with dirt between her toes and oil in her hair, he with his silks and steel. Dany could see the decision on his face. “He shall walk, Khaleesi,” he said. He took her brother’s horse in hand while Dany remounted her silver.
被放逐的骑士看看光着脚丫，趾间都是污泥，头发涂了香油的丹妮，再看看身穿丝衣，佩戴宝剑的哥哥。丹妮从他脸上读出了决定。“卡丽熙，就让他走路吧。”他说完，接过哥哥坐骑的缰绳，丹妮则重新跨上小银马。
Viserys gaped at him, and sat down in the dirt. He kept his silence, but he would not move, and his eyes were full of poison as they rode away. Soon he was lost in the tall grass. When they could not see him anymore, Dany grew afraid. “Will he find his way back?” she asked Ser Jorah as they rode.
韦赛里斯张大嘴看着他，重重地坐进尘土里。直到他们离开，他都保持着静默。他动也不动，眼神却怨毒无比。很快，他消失在高高的草浪之后。当见不到他时，丹妮又害怕起来。“他找得到路吗？”她边骑边问乔拉爵士。
“Even a man as blind as your brother should be able to follow our trail,” he replied.
“就算你哥哥那么盲目的人，也一定可以跟着我们留下的痕迹。”他回答。
“He is proud. He may be too shamed to come back.”
“他很骄傲，可能因为羞耻就不来了。”
Jorah laughed. “Where else should he go? If he cannot find the khalasar , the khalasar will most surely find him. It is hard to drown in the Dothraki sea, child.”
乔拉笑道：“那么他还有什么地方可去？就算他找不到卡拉萨，卡拉萨迟早也会找到他。孩子，想淹死在多斯拉克海里可不容易啊。”
Dany saw the truth of that. The khalasar was like a city on the march, but it did not march blindly. Always scouts ranged far ahead of the main column, alert for any sign of game or prey or enemies, while outriders guarded their flanks. They missed nothing, not here, in this land, the place where they had come from. These plains were a part of them … and of her, now.
丹妮觉得此话有理。卡拉萨好比一座移动的城市，但绝非盲目前进。主队前方必有斥候巡察，负责注意各种猎物和敌人踪迹，先驱部队则守护两翼。在这片多斯拉克人发源于斯的土地上，没有任何东西能逃过他们的注意。这片平原是他们的一部分……如今也是她的一部分。
“I hit him,” she said, wonder in her voice. Now that it was over, it seemed like some strange dream that she had dreamed. “Ser Jorah, do you think … he’ll be so angry when he gets back …” She shivered. “I woke the dragon, didn’t I?”
“我刚打了他。”她惊讶地说。现在回想起来，仿佛是一场怪梦。“乔拉爵士，你觉得……他回来的时候会不会很生气？”她颤抖着说，“我唤醒了睡龙之怒，对不对？”
Ser Jorah snorted. “Can you wake the dead, girl? Your brother Rhaegar was the last dragon, and he died on the Trident. Viserys is less than the shadow of a snake.”
乔拉爵士哼了一声：“孩子，你能叫醒死人吗？你大哥雷加是最后的真龙传人，而他已经死在三叉戟河畔。韦赛里斯连条蛇的影子都不如。”
His blunt words startled her. It seemed as though all the things she had always believed were suddenly called into question. “You … you swore him your sword …”
他的直言不讳让她大感震惊，仿佛一夕之间，她一直以来深信不疑的事情都变得不再明晰。“可你……你不是宣誓为他效命吗？”
“That I did, girl,” Ser Jorah said. “And if your brother is the shadow of a snake, what does that make his servants?” His voice was bitter.
“是啊，女孩。”乔拉爵士道，“那么假如你哥哥只是条蛇的影子，你觉得他的手下算什么呢？”他语气苦涩。
“He is still the true king. He is …”
“可他毕竟是真正的国王，他是……”
Jorah pulled up his horse and looked at her. “Truth now. Would you want to see Viserys sit a throne?”
乔拉拉住缰绳，看着她。“说实话，你希望韦赛里斯登上王位？”
Dany thought about that. “He would not be a very good king, would he?”
丹妮仔细想了想。“他不会是个很好的国王，对吧？”
“There have been worse … but not many.” The knight gave his heels to his mount and started off again.
“有比他还差的国王……但也不多。”骑士一夹马肚，继续前进。
Dany rode close beside him. “Still,” she said, “the common people are waiting for him. Magister Illyrio says they are sewing dragon banners and praying for Viserys to return from across the narrow sea to free them.”
丹妮上前，和他并肩而行。“不管怎么说，”她道，“可老百姓们还是等着他。伊利里欧总督说他们正忙着缝制真龙旗帜，祈祷韦赛里斯早日率军渡海解放他们。”
“The common people pray for rain, healthy children, and a summer that never ends,” Ser Jorah told her. “It is no matter to them if the high lords play their game of thrones, so long as they are left in peace.” He gave a shrug. “They never are.”
“老百姓祈祷的是风调雨顺、子女健康，以及永不结束的夏日。”乔拉爵士告诉她，“只要他们能安居乐业，王公贵族要怎么玩权力游戏都没关系。”他耸耸肩。“只是他们从来没能如愿。”
Dany rode along quietly for a time, working his words like a puzzle box. It went against everything that Viserys had ever told her to think that the people could care so little whether a true king or a usurper reigned over them. Yet the more she thought on Jorah’s words, the more they rang of truth.
丹妮静静地骑了一会儿，细细咀嚼他所说的话。老百姓居然不在乎统治他们的究竟是真龙天子还是篡夺叛逆，这和韦赛里斯说的一切都大相径庭啊。然而她越想越觉得乔拉爵士所言不虚。
“What do you pray for, Ser Jorah?” she asked him.
“那么你会为何事祈祷呢，乔拉爵士？”她问他。
“Home,” he said. His voice was thick with longing.
“我只想回家。”他的声音里带着浓浓的乡愁。
“I pray for home too,” she told him, believing it.
“我也是。”她完全能体会这种感觉。
Ser Jorah laughed. “Look around you then, Khaleesi.”
乔拉爵士笑了，“那你正该好好欣赏，卡丽熙。”
But it was not the plains Dany saw then. It was King’s Landing and the great Red Keep that Aegon the Conqueror had built. It was Dragonstone where she had been born. In her mind’s eye they burned with a thousand lights, a fire blazing in every window. In her mind’s eye, all the doors were red.
丹妮放眼望去，眼中却非草原，而是君临，是征服者伊耿建筑的雄伟红堡，是她降生的龙石岛。在她脑海里，它们伴随着万千道熊熊火光，每扇窗户都在燃烧。在她脑海里，每一扇门都是红色。
“My brother will never take back the Seven Kingdoms,” Dany said. She had known that for a long time, she realized. She had known it all her life. Only she had never let herself say the words, even in a whisper, but now she said them for Jorah Mormont and all the world to hear.
“哥哥永远无法夺回七国。”丹妮说。她发觉自己以前就知道，一辈子都知道，只是始终不让自己说出来，连窃窃私语也不肯。现在她要大声说出口，让乔拉·莫尔蒙，让全世界都听得见。
Ser Jorah gave her a measuring look. “You think not.”
乔拉爵士忖度着她。“你认为他没办法。”
“He could not lead an army even if my lord husband gave him one,” Dany said. “He has no coin and the only knight who follows him reviles him as less than a snake. The Dothraki make mock of his weakness. He will never take us home.”
“就算我夫君给他军队，他也没有统御的能力。”丹妮道，“他没有财产，惟一誓言追随他的骑士把他骂得连蛇都不如。多斯拉克人嘲笑他的脆弱。他永远没办法带我们回家。”
“Wise child.” The knight smiled.
“聪明的孩子。”骑士微笑。
“I am no child,” she told him fiercely. Her heels pressed into the sides of her mount, rousing the silver to a gallop. Faster and faster she raced, leaving Jorah and Irri and the others far behind, the warm wind in her hair and the setting sun red on her face. By the time she reached the khalasar , it was dusk.
“我不再是小孩子了。”她毅然决然地告诉他，跟着脚跟夹紧马肚，催促银马快跑。她越骑越快，把乔拉、伊丽和其他人远远地抛在后面，暖风满溢发间，夕阳红红地照在脸上。等她重回卡拉萨时，天色已经暗了下来。
The slaves had erected her tent by the shore of a spring-fed pool. She could hear rough voices from the woven grass palace on the hill. Soon there would be laughter, when the men of her khas told the story of what had happened in the grasses today. By the time Viserys came limping back among them, every man, woman, and child in the camp would know him for a walker. There were no secrets in the khalasar .
奴隶在一泓泉池畔为她搭起寝帐，她听见丘陵上草织宫殿传来的说话声。她知道，当她的卡斯部众说起今天在草丛里发生的事，便会有无数的嘲笑传来；当韦赛里斯一跛一跛地返回，营地里的男女老幼都会知道他是个走路的人。卡拉萨里是没有秘密的。
Dany gave the silver over to the slaves for grooming and entered her tent. It was cool and dim beneath the silk. As she let the door flap close behind her, Dany saw a finger of dusty red light reach out to touch her dragon’s eggs across the tent. For an instant a thousand droplets of scarlet flame swam before her eyes. She blinked, and they were gone.
丹妮把小银马交给奴仆照料，独自走进帐篷。丝帐里凉爽而昏暗。当门在她身后关上，丹妮只见一缕红色夕照射进来，映在她的龙蛋上。刹那间她眼前闪过千万血红火星，她眨眨眼，却又都不见了。
Stone , she told herself. They are only stone, even Illyrio said so, the dragons are all dead . She put her palm against the black egg, fingers spread gently across the curve of the shell. The stone was warm. Almost hot. “The sun,” Dany whispered. “The sun warmed them as they rode.”
石头，她告诉自己，不过是石头罢了，龙族早已灭绝，就连伊利里欧也这么说。她把掌心贴在那颗黑蛋上，手指轻柔地覆着蛋壳的曲线。石头暖烘烘的，甚至有点热。“阳光，”丹妮低语，“一定是阳光把它们晒热了。”
She commanded her handmaids to prepare her a bath. Doreah built a fire outside the tent, while Irri and Jhiqui fetched the big copper tub—another bride gift—from the packhorses and carried water from the pool. When the bath was steaming, Irri helped her into it and climbed in after her.
她吩咐女仆为她准备沐浴。多莉亚在帐外升起一炉火，伊丽和姬琪则合力从货运马匹处搬来大红铜澡盆——这也是件结婚礼物。等洗澡水烧得蒸腾，伊丽便搀扶她进入浴盆，然后自己也跟着爬进去。
“Have you ever seen a dragon?” she asked as Irri scrubbed her back and Jhiqui sluiced sand from her hair. She had heard that the first dragons had come from the east, from the Shadow Lands beyond Asshai and the islands of the Jade Sea. Perhaps some were still living there, in realms strange and wild.
“你们见过龙吗？”她趁伊丽帮她刷背，姬琪替她冲掉头发里的尘沙时发问。她曾听说龙最初来自东方，来自亚夏彼端的阴影之地和玉海中的岛群。或许有些龙还生存在那片蛮荒而诡谲的土地上。
“Dragons are gone, Khaleesi,” Irri said.
“卡丽熙，龙已经绝迹啦。”伊丽说。
“Dead,” agreed Jhiqui. “Long and long ago.”
“是啊，”姬琪同意，“好久好久以前就死光了。”
Viserys had told her that the last Targaryen dragons had died no more than a century and a half ago, during the reign of Aegon III, who was called the Dragonbane. That did not seem so long ago to Dany. “Everywhere?” she said, disappointed. “Even in the east?” Magic had died in the west when the Doom fell on Valyria and the Lands of the Long Summer, and neither spell-forged steel nor stormsingers nor dragons could hold it back, but Dany had always heard that the east was different. It was said that manticores prowled the islands of the Jade Sea, that basilisks infested the jungles of Yi Ti, that spellsingers, warlocks, and aeromancers practiced their arts openly in Asshai, while shadowbinders and bloodmages worked terrible sorceries in the black of night. Why shouldn’t there be dragons too?
韦赛里斯曾告诉她，坦格利安家最后的一条龙大约死于一个半世纪以前，当时是伊耿三世统治时期，他因而被人称为“龙祸”。对丹妮而言，这似乎不是那么遥远的事。“到处都一样？”她失望地说，“连东方也是？”当末日降临瓦雷利亚和永夏之地时，魔法也随之在西方绝迹，魔咒加持的宝剑、预测天气的风雨歌师以及巨龙统统都无法挽回。但丹妮总是听说东方的情形不同，据说蝎尾狮仍旧出没于玉海列岛，蛇蜥也依然盘据夷地丛林。据说呤咒师、男巫和云空法师公然活跃于亚夏，缚影士与血巫更在夜阑人静时施行骇人妖术。为什么不可能有龙存活呢？
“No dragon,” Irri said. “Brave men kill them, for dragon terrible evil beasts. It is known.”
“没有龙了。”伊丽说：“勇者屠龙，因为龙是可怕的怪兽。大家都知道。”
“It is known,” agreed Jhiqui.
“大家都知道。”姬琪表示同意。
“A trader from Qarth once told me that dragons came from the moon,” blond Doreah said as she warmed a towel over the fire. Jhiqui and Irri were of an age with Dany, Dothraki girls taken as slaves when Drogo destroyed their father’s khalasar . Doreah was older, almost twenty. Magister Illyrio had found her in a pleasure house in Lys.
“有个魁尔斯商人跟我说龙是从月亮里钻出来的。”金发碧眼的多莉亚一边在火炉上烘干毛巾一边说。姬琪和伊丽的年纪与丹妮差不多，她们都是在父亲的卡拉萨被卓戈毁灭时被抓来当了奴隶。多莉亚年纪稍长，将近二十。伊利里欧总督是在里斯的一家妓院里找到她的。
Silvery-wet hair tumbled across her eyes as Dany turned her head, curious. “The moon?”
丹妮好奇地转头，湿湿的银发飘扬在眼前。“从月亮来的？”
“He told me the moon was an egg, Khaleesi,” the Lysene girl said. “Once there were two moons in the sky, but one wandered too close to the sun and cracked from the heat. A thousand thousand dragons poured forth, and drank the fire of the sun. That is why dragons breathe flame. One day the other moon will kiss the sun too, and then it will crack and the dragons will return.”
“他告诉我月亮是颗蛋，卡丽熙。”这位里斯女孩道，“天上原本有两个月亮，但其中一个运行得太靠近太阳，受不住高热，就爆炸了。成千上万只的龙从中涌出，吸收了太阳的火焰，这就是为什么龙会吐火。有朝一日剩下的那个月亮也会亲吻太阳，然后也会爆炸，龙便将重返人间。”
The two Dothraki girls giggled and laughed. “You are foolish strawhead slave,” Irri said. “Moon is no egg. Moon is god, woman wife of sun. It is known.”
两个多斯拉克女孩吃吃娇笑。“你这个满头稻草的傻奴隶，”伊丽说，“月亮才不是什么蛋，月亮是女神，太阳的妻子，大家都知道。”
“It is known,” Jhiqui agreed.
“大家都知道。”姬琪附和。
Dany’s skin was flushed and pink when she climbed from the tub. Jhiqui laid her down to oil her body and scrape the dirt from her pores. Afterward Irri sprinkled her with spiceflower and cinnamon. While Doreah brushed her hair until it shone like spun silver, she thought about the moon, and eggs, and dragons.
丹妮爬出浴盆时，全身皮肤透红。姬琪要她躺下，为她周身抹油，并把她毛孔里的泥土刮干净。之后伊丽帮她洒上香花和肉桂。多莉亚为她梳头，把她的头发梳得亮如银线。其间，她一直在思索月亮、蛋和龙的事。
Her supper was a simple meal of fruit and cheese and fry bread, with a jug of honeyed wine to wash it down. “Doreah, stay and eat with me,” Dany commanded when she sent her other handmaids away. The Lysene girl had hair the color of honey, and eyes like the summer sky.
她的晚餐很简单，只是水果、乳酪和炸面包，配上一壶蜜酒。“多莉亚，留下来跟我一起吃。”丹妮遣走其他侍女时，这么下令。这位里斯女孩的发色如蜂蜜，眼睛则像夏日长空。
She lowered those eyes when they were alone. “You honor me, Khaleesi,” she said, but it was no honor, only service. Long after the moon had risen, they sat together, talking.
她们独处时，她垂下双眼。“卡丽熙，这是我的荣幸。”她说，但这并非荣幸，只是职责。月亮升起又高挂，她们一直坐在一起，促膝谈心。
That night, when Khal Drogo came, Dany was waiting for him. He stood in the door of her tent and looked at her with surprise. She rose slowly and opened her sleeping silks and let them fall to the ground. “This night we must go outside, my lord,” she told him, for the Dothraki believed that all things of importance in a man’s life must be done beneath the open sky.
当晚卓戈卡奥归来时，丹妮正等着他。他站在帐篷门口，惊讶地盯着她。她缓缓起身，揭开她的丝质睡衣，让衣服滑落在地。“夫君，今晚我们该到外面去。”她告诉他，因为多斯拉克人相信，一个男人生命中所有重要的事，都应该让宽敞的天空作见证。
Khal Drogo followed her out into the moonlight, the bells in his hair tinkling softly. A few yards from her tent was a bed of soft grass, and it was there that Dany drew him down. When he tried to turn her over, she put a hand on his chest. “No,” she said. “This night I would look on your face.”
卓戈卡奥跟着她走进月光，发间的铃铛轻声作响。寝帐数码之外有片柔软的草床，丹妮便把他带到这里。当他要把她转过去时，她伸手放在他的胸口。“不，”她说，“今晚我要看着你的脸”。
There is no privacy in the heart of the khalasar . Dany felt the eyes on her as she undressed him, heard the soft voices as she did the things that Doreah had told her to do. It was nothing to her. Was she not khaleesi? His were the only eyes that mattered, and when she mounted him she saw something there that she had never seen before. She rode him as fiercely as ever she had ridden her silver, and when the moment of his pleasure came, Khal Drogo called out her name.
在卡拉萨里没有隐私可言。丹妮一边为他宽衣解带，一边感觉众人落下的目光；她一边照着多莉亚所说的去做，一边听见别人窃窃私语。对她来说这都没什么。难道她不是卡丽熙吗？她只在乎他的目光，而当她骑到他身上时，在他的眼里她看到了前所未见的萌动。她猛烈地骑他，一如骑自己的小银马。最后，当高潮来临，卓戈卡奥喊了她的名字。
They were on the far side of the Dothraki sea when Jhiqui brushed the soft swell of Dany’s stomach with her fingers and said, “Khaleesi , you are with child.”
在他们抵达多斯拉克海遥远的中心后，姬琪轻抚丹妮微凸的腹部，说：“卡丽熙，您有身孕了。”
“I know,” Dany told her.
“我知道。”丹妮告诉她。
It was her fourteenth name day.
那天，是她十四岁命名日。
*BRAN
第二十五章 布兰
I n the yard below, Rickon ran with the wolves.
瑞肯在下方的庭院里与狼一同奔跑嬉闹。
Bran watched from his window seat. Wherever the boy went, Grey Wind was there first, loping ahead to cut him off, until Rickon saw him, screamed in delight, and went pelting off in another direction. Shaggydog ran at his heels, spinning and snapping if the other wolves came too close. His fur had darkened until he was all black, and his eyes were green fire. Bran’s Summer came last. He was silver and smoke, with eyes of yellow gold that saw all there was to see. Smaller than Grey Wind, and more wary. Bran thought he was the smartest of the litter. He could hear his brother’s breathless laughter as Rickon dashed across the hard-packed earth on little baby legs.
布兰从窗台上看着这一切。不论小男孩跑到哪里，灰风总是抢先一步，跨步截断他的路，瑞肯看到他，兴奋地尖叫，然后又朝另一个方向奔去。毛毛狗和他寸步不离，若是其他狼靠得太近就转身咆哮。它的毛色已经变深，如今通体漆黑，眼睛如一团绿火。布兰的夏天落在最后，他的毛色乃是银白和烟灰相间，金黄的眼睛异常敏锐。它的块头比灰风稍小，却更机警。布兰私下认为它是狼群里最聪明的一只。看着瑞肯鼓动那双娃娃腿，在硬泥地上来回奔跑，布兰可以听见弟弟气喘吁吁的笑声。
His eyes stung. He wanted to be down there, laughing and running. Angry at the thought, Bran knuckled away the tears before they could fall. His eighth name day had come and gone. He was almost a man grown now, too old to cry.
他只觉眼睛刺痛。他好想下去，好想笑闹跑跳。布兰越想越气，赶紧在眼泪掉下以前用指节抹掉。他的八岁命名日来了又去，他已经接近成年，不能再哭了。
“It was just a lie,” he said bitterly, remembering the crow from his dream. “I can’t fly. I can’t even run.”
“都是骗人的，”他苦涩地说，想起了梦中的乌鸦。“我不会飞，连跑都没办法。”
“Crows are all liars,” Old Nan agreed, from the chair where she sat doing her needlework. “I know a story about a crow.”
“乌鸦本来就很会说谎。”坐在椅子上做针线活的老奶妈附议。“我知道一个乌鸦的故事。”
“I don’t want any more stories,” Bran snapped, his voice petulant. He had liked Old Nan and her stories once. Before. But it was different now. They left her with him all day now, to watch over him and clean him and keep him from being lonely, but she just made it worse. “I hate your stupid stories.”
“我不要听故事，”布兰语气暴躁地斥道。他曾经很喜欢老奶妈和她说的那些故事。但那都是过去的事，现在情形不一样了。他们要她整天陪着他，让她照顾他，为他洗澡，以免他寂寞孤单，但她的存在却只让事情更糟。“我恨你那些蠢故事。”
The old woman smiled at him toothlessly. “My stories? No, my little lord, not mine. The stories are , before me and after me, before you too.”
老妇人张开无牙的嘴对他微笑，“我的故事？不对，我的小少爷，不是我的。这些故事早在你我出生之前就已经存在了。”
She was a very ugly old woman, Bran thought spitefully; shrunken and wrinkled, almost blind, too weak to climb stairs, with only a few wisps of white hair left to cover a mottled pink scalp. No one really knew how old she was, but his father said she’d been called Old Nan even when he was a boy. She was the oldest person in Winterfell for certain, maybe the oldest person in the Seven Kingdoms. Nan had come to the castle as a wet nurse for a Brandon Stark whose mother had died birthing him. He had been an older brother of Lord Rickard, Bran’s grandfather, or perhaps a younger brother, or a brother to Lord Rickard’s father. Sometimes Old Nan told it one way and sometimes another. In all the stories the little boy died at three of a summer chill, but Old Nan stayed on at Winterfell with her own children. She had lost both her sons to the war when King Robert won the throne, and her grandson was killed on the walls of Pyke during Balon Greyjoy’s rebellion. Her daughters had long ago married and moved away and died. All that was left of her own blood was Hodor, the simpleminded giant who worked in the stables, but Old Nan just lived on and on, doing her needlework and telling her stories.
她真是个丑老太婆，布兰恶毒地想：佝偻着缩成一团，满脸皱纹，眼睛差不多瞎掉，连爬楼梯的力气都没有，满是斑点的粉红头皮上只剩几小撮白发。没人知道她究竟有多老，父亲说他小时候大家就已经叫她老奶妈了。她无疑是临冬城里最老的人，说不定是七国里最老的寿星。她初来城堡，是为当布兰登·史塔克奶妈，因为他的母亲在生他的时候难产而死。此人是布兰的祖父瑞卡德公爵的哥哥，或许是弟弟，或是瑞卡德公爵父亲的兄弟。老奶妈每次说的都不一样。但不管哪个版本，故事里那小男孩总死于三岁时夏天的一场风寒，老奶妈和她的孩子们却在临冬城长住下来。她的两个儿子都死于劳勃国王夺取王位的那场战争，她的孙子则在平定巴隆·葛雷乔伊叛变时于派克的城墙上殉难。她的女儿们早已陆续远嫁他乡，现在也都不在人世。如今她的血脉只剩下阿多，就是那个头脑简单，在马房里工作的巨人。只有老奶妈依旧好端端地活着，继续做她的针线，说她的故事。
“I don’t care whose stories they are,” Bran told her, “I hate them.” He didn’t want stories and he didn’t want Old Nan. He wanted his mother and father. He wanted to go running with Summer loping beside him. He wanted to climb the broken tower and feed corn to the crows. He wanted to ride his pony again with his brothers. He wanted it to be the way it had been before.
“我才不管是谁的故事。”布兰告诉她，“我就是讨厌它们。”他不想听故事，也不要老奶妈。他想要父亲母亲，想到外面尽情奔跑，让夏天陪在身边。他想爬上残塔，喂乌鸦吃玉米。他想跨上他的小马，和两个哥哥一起驱驰。他想要一切都回到从前的样子。
“I know a story about a boy who hated stories,” Old Nan said with her stupid little smile, her needles moving all the while, click click click , until Bran was ready to scream at her.
“我知道有个故事是在讲讨厌听故事的小男孩。”老奶妈露出她那蠢笨的笑容说，她手中的针同时还穿梭个不停，喀，喀，喀，听得布兰直想对她尖叫。
It would never be the way it had been, he knew. The crow had tricked him into flying, but when he woke up he was broken and the world was changed. They had all left him, his father and his mother and his sisters and even his bastard brother Jon. His father had promised he would ride a real horse to King’s Landing, but they’d gone without him. Maester Luwin had sent a bird after Lord Eddard with a message, and another to Mother and a third to Jon on the Wall, but there had been no answers. “Ofttimes the birds are lost, child,” the maester had told him. “There’s many a mile and many a hawk between here and King’s Landing, the message may not have reached them.” Yet to Bran it felt as if they had all died while he had slept … or perhaps Bran had died, and they had forgotten him. Jory and Ser Rodrik and Vayon Poole had gone too, and Hullen and Harwin and Fat Tom and a quarter of the guard.
他知道一切都回不去了。乌鸦骗他飞，结果他醒来之后，不但两脚残废，世界也都改变。父亲母亲和两个姐姐弃他而去，甚至连私生子哥哥琼恩也不告而别。父亲原本答应让他骑真正的骏马前往君临，但他们没等他便动身南下。鲁温师傅差了一只鸟把他醒来的消息带给艾德公爵，又派一只给母亲，一只给守卫长城的琼恩，然而全都音信杳然。“孩子，鸟儿常常会迷路。”师傅这么告诉他，“从这里到君临有好长一段路要飞，有无数老鹰伺机拦截，信不一定能传到他们手中。”然而对布兰而言，他们好像都已在他沉睡时死去……或者说死的是布兰，而他们已然将他遗忘。乔里、罗德利克爵士、维扬·普尔、胡伦、哈尔温，胖汤姆以及四分之一的守卫也都走了。
Only Robb and baby Rickon were still here, and Robb was changed. He was Robb the Lord now, or trying to be. He wore a real sword and never smiled. His days were spent drilling the guard and practicing his swordplay, making the yard ring with the sound of steel as Bran watched forlornly from his window. At night he closeted himself with Maester Luwin, talking or going over account books. Sometimes he would ride out with Hallis Mollen and be gone for days at a time, visiting distant holdfasts. Whenever he was away more than a day, Rickon would cry and ask Bran if Robb was ever coming back. Even when he was home at Winterfell, Robb the Lord seemed to have more time for Hallis Mollen and Theon Greyjoy than he ever did for his brothers.
只有罗柏和小瑞肯留下来，但罗柏也变了个人。现在的罗柏是一城之主，至少他正朝这个目标努力。他佩上一把真正的剑，从来不笑。白天他把时间都花在操演士兵和练习剑术上，金铁交击声充斥校场，布兰却只能孤独地坐在窗台边观看；到了晚上，罗柏把自己和鲁温师傅锁在房里，交换意见或讨论账目。有时他会和哈里斯·莫兰骑马出巡，一去就是好几天。而只要他外出超过一日，瑞肯便会哭着追问布兰罗柏还会不会回来。其实就算待在临冬城，罗柏城主也都和哈里斯·莫兰与席恩·葛雷乔伊待在一块，没时间陪两个弟弟。
“I could tell you the story about Brandon the Builder,” Old Nan said. “That was always your favorite.”
“我来说说筑城者布兰登的故事吧，”老奶妈说，“你最喜欢这个故事了。”
Thousands and thousands of years ago, Brandon the Builder had raised Winterfell, and some said the Wall. Bran knew the story, but it had never been his favorite. Maybe one of the other Brandons had liked that story. Sometimes Nan would talk to him as if he were her Brandon, the baby she had nursed all those years ago, and sometimes she confused him with his uncle Brandon, who was killed by the Mad King before Bran was even born. She had lived so long, Mother had told him once, that all the Brandon Starks had become one person in her head.
几千年以前，筑城者布兰登兴建了临冬城，有人说绝境长城也是他建造的。布兰知道这个故事，但他并不特别喜欢。喜欢这个故事的，或许是另一个叫布兰登的孩子。有时老奶妈会误以为他是许多年以前她养大的那个布兰登，有时又会把他和布兰登伯伯混为一人，而伯伯早在他出生以前就被疯王所害。她活了这么多年，母亲曾对他说，以至于所有叫布兰登·史塔克的人在她脑子里都变成了同一个。
“That’s not my favorite,” he said. “My favorites were the scary ones.” He heard some sort of commotion outside and turned back to the window. Rickon was running across the yard toward the gatehouse, the wolves following him, but the tower faced the wrong way for Bran to see what was happening. He smashed a fist on his thigh in frustration and felt nothing.
“我最喜欢的才不是这个，”他说，“我喜欢的是那些吓人的。”他听见外面传来一阵骚动，转身望向窗外。瑞肯正穿过广场，朝城门楼跑去，狼群跟在后面。然而布兰所处的高塔方向不对，看不到究竟发生了什么。他不由得恼怒地一拳捶在大腿上，却毫无感觉。
“Oh, my sweet summer child,” Old Nan said quietly, “what do you know of fear? Fear is for the winter, my little lord, when the snows fall a hundred feet deep and the ice wind comes howling out of the north. Fear is for the long night, when the sun hides its face for years at a time, and little children are born and live and die all in darkness while the direwolves grow gaunt and hungry, and the white walkers move through the woods.”
“噢，我亲爱的孩子啊，你出生在夏季，”老奶妈静静地说，“你哪里懂得真正的恐惧？小少爷，当冬天来临，积雪百尺，冰风狂啸，那才是真正的恐怖。当长夜漫漫，终年不见天日，小孩在黑夜里诞生、在黑夜里长大、在黑夜里死亡，而冰原狼骨瘦嶙峋，白鬼穿梭林间，那才是恐惧降临之时。”
“You mean the Others,” Bran said querulously.
“你说的是异鬼罢。”布兰暴躁地说。
“The Others,” Old Nan agreed. “Thousands and thousands of years ago, a winter fell that was cold and hard and endless beyond all memory of man. There came a night that lasted a generation, and kings shivered and died in their castles even as the swineherds in their hovels. Women smothered their children rather than see them starve, and cried, and felt their tears freeze on their cheeks.” Her voice and her needles fell silent, and she glanced up at Bran with pale, filmy eyes and asked, “So, child. This is the sort of story you like?”
“是啊，”老奶妈同意，“几千年前，一个出奇寒冷严酷的漫长冬季降临人间，只是今天的人类不复记忆。在一个长达整整一代人的长夜里，城中的国王和圈里的猪倌同样颤抖着死去。母亲们宁可闷死自己的孩子，也不愿见他们挨饿受冻。她们放声大哭，眼泪却冻结在脸颊上。”话音和织针同时静止，她抬起头，用那双惨白，像是覆盖了一层薄膜的眼睛看着布兰，问道：“孩子，你喜欢听的就是这种故事？”
“Well,” Bran said reluctantly, “yes, only …”
“嗯，”布兰很不情愿地说，“是啊，不过……”
Old Nan nodded. “In that darkness, the Others came for the first time,” she said as her needles went click click click . “They were cold things, dead things, that hated iron and fire and the touch of the sun, and every creature with hot blood in its veins. They swept over holdfasts and cities and kingdoms, felled heroes and armies by the score, riding their pale dead horses and leading hosts of the slain. All the swords of men could not stay their advance, and even maidens and suckling babes found no pity in them. They hunted the maids through frozen forests, and fed their dead servants on the flesh of human children.”
老奶妈点点头。“在一片黑暗中，异鬼降临人间，”她一边说，手中针线一边作响，咯，咯，咯。“他们是冰冷与死亡的怪兽，痛恨钢铁、烈火和阳光，以及所有流淌着温热血液的生命。他们骑着苍白的死马，率领死人组成的军队，横扫农村、城市和王国，杀死成千上万的英雄和士兵。人类的剑无法阻止他们前进，老幼妇孺也难逃魔掌。他们在结冰的森林里追捕少女，用人类婴儿的肉来饲养手下的死灵仆役。”
Her voice had dropped very low, almost to a whisper, and Bran found himself leaning forward to listen.
此时她的声音已经降得极低，几乎像是呓语，布兰不自觉地倾身向前。
“Now these were the days before the Andals came, and long before the women fled across the narrow sea from the cities of the Rhoyne, and the hundred kingdoms of those times were the kingdoms of the First Men, who had taken these lands from the children of the forest. Yet here and there in the fastness of the woods the children still lived in their wooden cities and hollow hills, and the faces in the trees kept watch. So as cold and death filled the earth, the last hero determined to seek out the children, in the hopes that their ancient magics could win back what the armies of men had lost. He set out into the dead lands with a sword, a horse, a dog, and a dozen companions. For years he searched, until he despaired of ever finding the children of the forest in their secret cities. One by one his friends died, and his horse, and finally even his dog, and his sword froze so hard the blade snapped when he tried to use it. And the Others smelled the hot blood in him, and came silent on his trail, stalking him with packs of pale white spiders big as hounds—”
“当时安达尔人还未统治七国，更是早在女人从洛恩河畔的古城邦渡狭海逃亡而来以前。只有先民从森林之子手中夺得土地，建立了林立四方的数百邦国。但在浓密的森林深处，森林之子依旧蛰居在他们的树上城镇和空山幽谷里。所以当大地充斥寒冷与死亡时，最后的英雄决定去寻找这些森林的儿女，冀望他们的远古魔法能抵挡人类所无法抵挡的军队。他佩上宝剑，骑乘骏马，带着猎犬，与一群同伴朝荒原启程。经过多年的长途跋涉，苦苦追寻，他始终找不到藏身秘密城市的森林之子，最后他绝望了。他的朋友相继罹难，他的战马和爱犬也先后死去，就连他的宝剑也被冻结成冰，一触即碎。这时，异鬼嗅到他体内温热的血液，悄悄地追踪他的足迹，带了一群大如猎狗的白蜘蛛偷袭——”
The door opened with a bang , and Bran’s heart leapt up into his mouth in sudden fear, but it was only Maester Luwin, with Hodor looming in the stairway behind him. “Hodor!” the stableboy announced, as was his custom, smiling hugely at them all.
房门“砰”地一声打开，把布兰吓得心脏都快从嘴里跳将出来。但进来的人不过是鲁温师傅，阿多站在他身后的楼梯间。“阿多！”马僮叫道，这是他的习惯，他还咧嘴朝大家微笑。
Maester Luwin was not smiling. “We have visitors,” he announced, “and your presence is required, Bran.”
鲁温师傅没笑。“我们有访客。”他宣布，“而你必须出席，布兰。”
“I’m listening to a story now,” Bran complained.
“我正听故事哪。”布兰抱怨。
“Stories wait, my little lord, and when you come back to them, why, there they are,” Old Nan said. “Visitors are not so patient, and ofttimes they bring stories of their own.”
“小少爷，故事可以等下再听，待会儿您回来的时候，呵，它们都好端端地等着你呢。”老奶妈说，“客人可没这么有耐心哟，而且啊，他们常会带来自己的故事呢。”
“Who is it?” Bran asked Maester Luwin.
“是谁啊？”布兰问鲁温师傅。
“Tyrion Lannister, and some men of the Night’s Watch, with word from your brother Jon. Robb is meeting with them now. Hodor, will you help Bran down to the hall?”
“提利昂·兰尼斯特，还有几位守夜人弟兄，说是有你哥哥琼恩的口信。罗柏正在会见他们。阿多，请你帮忙把布兰带到大厅去吧？”
“Hodor!” Hodor agreed happily. He ducked to get his great shaggy head under the door. Hodor was nearly seven feet tall. It was hard to believe that he was the same blood as Old Nan. Bran wondered if he would shrivel up as small as his great-grandmother when he was old. It did not seem likely, even if Hodor lived to be a thousand.
“阿多！”阿多开心地同意。他弯身让他那颗毛茸茸的大头穿过门。阿多高近七尺，很难相信他竟是老奶妈的后代。布兰暗自猜想，不知他年老时，会不会跟他曾祖母一样缩成那么一团。只怕阿多就算活个一千年，这也不大可能。
Hodor lifted Bran as easy as if he were a bale of hay, and cradled him against his massive chest. He always smelled faintly of horses, but it was not a bad smell. His arms were thick with muscle and matted with brown hair. “Hodor,” he said again. Theon Greyjoy had once commented that Hodor did not know much, but no one could doubt that he knew his name. Old Nan had cackled like a hen when Bran told her that, and confessed that Hodor’s real name was Walder. No one knew where “Hodor” had come from, she said, but when he started saying it, they started calling him by it. It was the only word he had.
阿多像举稻草一样轻易地举起布兰，抱在胸前。他身上总有股淡淡的马臊味，好在还可以忍受。他的双臂肌肉虬张，长满褐色体毛。“阿多。”他又说了一次。席恩·葛雷乔伊曾评论说阿多虽然所知有限，但谁也不能怀疑他知道自己的名字。布兰把这件事告诉老奶妈，她像只母鸡般咯咯直笑，并偷偷告诉他阿多的本名是瓦德。没人知道“阿多”这名字是打哪儿来的，她说，但当他开始说这个词的时候，大家就如此称呼他了。这是他惟一会说的词。
They left Old Nan in the tower room with her needles and her memories. Hodor hummed tunelessly as he carried Bran down the steps and through the gallery, with Maester Luwin following behind, hurrying to keep up with the stableboy’s long strides.
于是他们离开高塔房间里的老奶妈，把她留给针线活和回忆。阿多不成调地哼歌，抱着布兰步下阶梯，穿过走廊。鲁温师傅跟在后面，加快脚步以跟上马夫的宽大步幅。
Robb was seated in Father’s high seat, wearing ringmail and boiled leather and the stern face of Robb the Lord. Theon Greyjoy and Hallis Mollen stood behind him. A dozen guardsmen lined the grey stone walls beneath tall narrow windows. In the center of the room the dwarf stood with his servants, and four strangers in the black of the Night’s Watch. Bran could sense the anger in the hall the moment that Hodor carried him through the doors.
罗柏正坐在父亲的高位上，穿着环甲和硬皮衣，一脸罗柏城主的严峻表情。席恩·葛雷乔伊和哈里斯·莫兰站在他身后。十来个守卫一字排开，紧靠灰石墙，站在高高的窄窗下。大厅的正中央则站着侏儒和他的仆从，还有四个身着守夜人黑衣的陌生人。阿多刚抱着他踏进门，布兰就感觉房里弥漫着一股怒气。
“Any man of the Night’s Watch is welcome here at Winterfell for as long as he wishes to stay,” Robb was saying with the voice of Robb the Lord. His sword was across his knees, the steel bare for all the world to see. Even Bran knew what it meant to greet a guest with an unsheathed sword.
“只要是守夜人的弟兄，我们都欢迎，各位在临冬城想住多久就住多久。”罗柏用城主罗柏的声音说。他的佩剑横放在膝上，让大家都能看见。即便布兰也知道摆着出鞘的武器待客是什么道理。
“Any man of the Night’s Watch,” the dwarf repeated, “but not me, do I take your meaning, boy?”
“只要是守夜人的弟兄，”侏儒重复，“所以我不算啰。你就这意思，小子？”
Robb stood and pointed at the little man with his sword. “I am the lord here while my mother and father are away, Lannister. I am not your boy.”
罗柏霍地起身，举剑指着小矮子道：“兰尼斯特，我父母亲不在的时候，我就是城主。我不是什么小子。”
“If you are a lord, you might learn a lord’s courtesy,” the little man replied, ignoring the sword point in his face. “Your bastard brother has all your father’s graces, it would seem.”
“你要当城主，好歹也该懂点儿城主应有的礼貌。”小矮子回敬，毫不理会眼前的剑尖。“我看，你爹把所有的礼貌都留给你那私生子老弟了。”
“Jon,” Bran gasped out from Hodor’s arms.
“琼恩。”布兰在阿多怀里叫道。
The dwarf turned to look at him. “So it is true, the boy lives. I could scarce believe it. You Starks are hard to kill.”
侏儒转身看他。“看来这孩子果真活下来了。真不敢相信，你们史塔克的命还真硬。”
“You Lannisters had best remember that,” Robb said, lowering his sword. “Hodor, bring my brother here.”
“这点你们兰尼斯特家最好牢牢记住。”罗柏边说边放下剑，“阿多，把我弟弟带过来。”
“Hodor,” Hodor said, and he trotted forward smiling and set Bran in the high seat of the Starks, where the Lords of Winterfell had sat since the days when they called themselves the Kings in the North. The seat was cold stone, polished smooth by countless bottoms; the carved heads of direwolves snarled on the ends of its massive arms. Bran clasped them as he sat, his useless legs dangling. The great seat made him feel half a baby.
“阿多。”阿多笑着小跑向前，把布兰放在史塔克家族的高位上。远自临冬城的主人称王北地开始，历代的统治者都坐着这把交椅。冰冷的石座椅早已被无数的过客磨得平滑无比。两边巨大的扶手前端雕刻了咆哮的冰原狼头。布兰抓紧扶手坐下，残废的双腿在空中摆荡。这张大椅子让他觉得自己像个小婴儿。
Robb put a hand on his shoulder. “You said you had business with Bran. Well, here he is, Lannister.”
罗柏伸手按在他肩上。“兰尼斯特，你说有话要对布兰讲。他人就在这儿呢。”
Bran was uncomfortably aware of Tyrion Lannister’s eyes. One was black and one was green, and both were looking at him, studying him, weighing him. “I am told you were quite the climber, Bran,” the little man said at last. “Tell me, how is it you happened to fall that day?”
布兰很不舒服地看着提利昂·兰尼斯特的眼睛。一颗黑，一颗绿，而两颗都正盯着他瞧，仔细审视忖度他。“布兰，我听说你很能爬上爬下，”最后小矮子终于开口，“告诉我，你那天怎么会摔下去的？”
“I never,” Bran insisted. He never fell, never never never .
“我没有摔下去。”布兰坚持。他明明就没有摔下去，没有没有没有。
“The child does not remember anything of the fall, or the climb that came before it,” said Maester Luwin gently.
“这孩子完全不记得摔下去的事，也不记得之前是怎么爬的。”鲁温师傅轻轻地说。
“Curious,” said Tyrion Lannister.
“这倒奇了。”提利昂·兰尼斯特道。
“My brother is not here to answer questions, Lannister,” Robb said curtly. “Do your business and be on your way.”
“兰尼斯特，我弟弟可不是来接受盘查的。”罗柏不客气地说。“把要说的说完，然后赶紧离开。”
“I have a gift for you,” the dwarf said to Bran. “Do you like to ride, boy?”
“我有件礼物要送你，”侏儒对布兰说，“小子，你喜欢骑马吗？”
Maester Luwin came forward. “My lord, the child has lost the use of his legs. He cannot sit a horse.”
鲁温师傅上前道：“大人，这孩子的腿已经不能用了，他没办法骑马啊。”
“Nonsense,” said Lannister. “With the right horse and the right saddle, even a cripple can ride.”
“见鬼，”兰尼斯特说，“只要有合适的马匹和鞍具，就算残废也能骑。”
The word was a knife through Bran’s heart. He felt tears come unbidden to his eyes. “I’m not a cripple!”
这句话如利刃刺进布兰心坎。他只觉泪水不听使唤地充满眼眶。“我不是残废！”
“Then I am not a dwarf,” the dwarf said with a twist of his mouth. “My father will rejoice to hear it.” Greyjoy laughed.
“那我也不是侏儒啰。”侏儒撇撇嘴，“老爸听了不知多高兴。”葛雷乔伊在旁哈哈大笑。
“What sort of horse and saddle are you suggesting?” Maester Luwin asked.
“您说的是什么样的马匹和鞍具呢？”鲁温师傅问。
“A smart horse,” Lannister replied. “The boy cannot use his legs to command the animal, so you must shape the horse to the rider, teach it to respond to the reins, to the voice. I would begin with an unbroken yearling, with no old training to be unlearned,” He drew a rolled paper from his belt. “Give this to your saddler. He will provide the rest.”
“一匹聪明的马。”兰尼斯特答道，“这孩子没法用腿指挥坐骑，所以你们得让马儿去适应他，教它懂得缰绳的含意，认识主人的声音。我建议从未参加训练的一岁小马开始，这样就不用废弃之前的练习重头教起。”他从腰带里抽出一张卷好的纸。“把这个交给你们的马鞍师傅，照着做就行了。”
Maester Luwin took the paper from the dwarf’s hand, curious as a small grey squirrel. He unrolled it, studied it. “I see. You draw nicely, my lord. Yes, this ought to work. I should have thought of this myself.”
鲁温师傅像只好奇的小灰松鼠般从侏儒手中接过纸片，展开阅读。“我懂了。大人您画得很清楚。没错，这应该行得通，我早该想到的。”
“It came easier to me, Maester. It is not terribly unlike my own saddles.”
“师傅，由我想比较容易。因为这该死的东西和我自己的马鞍相去不远。”
“Will I truly be able to ride?” Bran asked. He wanted to believe them, but he was afraid. Perhaps it was just another lie. The crow had promised him that he could fly.
“我真能骑马吗？”布兰问。他好想相信他们，却又生怕这是骗局一场。乌鸦还说他能飞呢。
“You will,” the dwarf told him. “And I swear to you, boy, on horseback you will be as tall as any of them.”
“没问题。”侏儒告诉他：“而且我向你保证，小子，骑在马上，你跟别人一样高。”
Robb Stark seemed puzzled. “Is this some trap, Lannister? What’s Bran to you? Why should you want to help him?”
罗柏·史塔克一脸迷惑。“兰尼斯特，你耍什么把戏？布兰跟你有何干系？你为什么要帮他？”
“Your brother Jon asked it of me. And I have a tender spot in my heart for cripples and bastards and broken things.” Tyrion Lannister placed a hand over his heart and grinned.
“是你琼恩老弟求我的。而就我自己来说，特别同情杂种，残废和其他缺陷怪胎。”提利昂·兰尼斯特捂住心口嘻嘻笑道。
The door to the yard flew open. Sunlight came streaming across the hall as Rickon burst in, breathless. The direwolves were with him. The boy stopped by the door, wide-eyed, but the wolves came on. Their eyes found Lannister, or perhaps they caught his scent. Summer began to growl first. Grey Wind picked it up. They padded toward the little man, one from the right and one from the left.
这时通往广场的门突然轰地敞开。阳光射进大厅，瑞肯上气不接下气地冲了进来，冰原狼群跟在旁边。他睁大双眼停在门口，但狼却没停下，他们的眼睛盯上兰尼斯特，嗅到了他的气味。夏天首先龇牙咧嘴，灰风也立刻跟进。他们一左一右，朝小矮子步步进逼。
“The wolves do not like your smell, Lannister,” Theon Greyjoy commented.
“兰尼斯特，看来这几只狼不太喜欢你的味道哪。”席恩·葛雷乔伊评论。
“Perhaps it’s time I took my leave,” Tyrion said. He took a step backward … and Shaggydog came out of the shadows behind him, snarling. Lannister recoiled, and Summer lunged at him from the other side. He reeled away, unsteady on his feet, and Grey Wind snapped at his arm, teeth ripping at his sleeve and tearing loose a scrap of cloth.
“或许我该走了。”提利昂说。他向后退开一步……突然毛毛狗从他背后的阴影里咆哮跳出。兰尼斯特急忙转身，夏天又从另外一边朝他扑去。他蹒跚地躲开，脚步踉跄，灰风开始撕扯他的手臂，利齿咬破衣袖，扯下一块布。
“No!” Bran shouted from the high seat as Lannister’s men reached for their steel. “Summer, here . Summer, to me!”
“住手！”眼看兰尼斯特家的随从纷纷伸手拔剑，布兰连忙从高位上喊道，“夏天，过来。夏天，到我这边来！”
The direwolf heard the voice, glanced at Bran, and again at Lannister. He crept backward, away from the little man, and settled down below Bran’s dangling feet.
冰原狼听到声音，瞟了布兰一眼，又转头看看兰尼斯特。他从小矮子身边走开，趴到布兰晃来晃去的双腿下。
Robb had been holding his breath. He let it out with a sigh and called, “Grey Wind.” His direwolf moved to him, swift and silent. Now there was only Shaggy dog, rumbling at the small man, his eyes burning like green fire.
罗柏原本屏气凝神，这时他也叹了口气，唤道：“灰风。”他的冰原狼安静而迅速地跑到他身边。只剩下毛毛狗眼里闪着绿火，还在对小矮子低吼。
“Rickon, call him,” Bran shouted to his baby brother, and Rickon remembered himself and screamed, “Home, Shaggy, home now.” The black wolf gave Lannister one final snarl and bounded off to Rickon, who hugged him tightly around the neck.
“瑞肯，叫它停手。”布兰朝他的小弟喊道，瑞肯这才回过神来尖叫：“回家啰，毛毛，回家啰。”黑狼朝兰尼斯特吼了最后一声，然后朝瑞肯跑去，瑞肯紧紧搂住他的脖子。
Tyrion Lannister undid his scarf, mopped at his brow, and said in a flat voice, “How interesting.”
提利昂·兰尼斯特解下围巾，抹抹额头，用平板的声音说：“这可真有意思。”
“Are you well, my lord?” asked one of his men, his sword in hand. He glanced nervously at the direwolves as he spoke.
“大人，您没事罢？”他的一名手下握着剑问，边说边紧张地看看那群冰原狼。
“My sleeve is torn and my breeches are unaccountably damp, but nothing was harmed save my dignity.”
“袖子破了，裤子里面湿得一塌糊涂，但除了自尊心受损，总算没缺胳膊断腿。”
Even Robb looked shaken. “The wolves … I don’t know why they did that …”
连罗柏都很惊讶。“这些狼……我不懂他们为什么会……”
“No doubt they mistook me for dinner.” Lannister bowed stiffly to Bran. “I thank you for calling them off, young ser. I promise you, they would have found me quite indigestible. And now I will be leaving, truly.”
“想必它们是错把我当晚餐了。”兰尼斯特僵硬地朝布兰鞠个躬。“小骑士，感谢您把他们叫开。不然的话，我跟您保证他们会觉得我很难吃的。现在我走啦，真的。”
“A moment, my lord,” Maester Luwin said. He moved to Robb and they huddled close together, whispering. Bran tried to hear what they were saying, but their voices were too low.
“大人，请您等等。”鲁温师傅说。他走到罗柏身旁，两人交头接耳了一会儿。布兰想听听他们在说什么，但话音太低。
Robb Stark finally sheathed his sword. “I … I may have been hasty with you,” he said. “You’ve done Bran a kindness, and, well …” Robb composed himself with an effort. “The hospitality of Winterfell is yours if you wish it, Lannister.”
罗柏·史塔克终于把剑收回鞘里。“我……我想我是太急躁了，”他说，“您帮了布兰一个大忙，嗯，所以……”罗柏竭力想让口气自然。“如果您愿意的话，兰尼斯特，就让临冬城款待您罢。”
“Spare me your false courtesies, boy. You do not love me and you do not want me here. I saw an inn outside your walls, in the winter town. I’ll find a bed there, and both of us will sleep easier. For a few coppers I may even find a comely wench to warm the sheets for me.” He spoke to one of the black brothers, an old man with a twisted back and a tangled beard. “Yoren, we go south at daybreak. You will find me on the road, no doubt.” With that he made his exit, struggling across the hall on his short legs, past Rickon and out the door. His men followed.
“小子，少假惺惺。你既不喜欢我，也不希望我待在这儿。我看城外的避冬市镇里有家旅店，我还是去那儿弄张床，这样我们俩都会睡得安稳些。说不定我还可以花两个铜板，找个标致姑娘帮我暖暖床咧。”他转向一位年老驼背又满脸胡碴的黑衣弟兄说，“尤伦，我们天一亮就往南走，你一定可以在路上找到我的。”说完他挣扎着摆动起那双短腿，经过瑞肯身边，走出门外，他的手下紧跟在后。
The four of the Night’s Watch remained. Robb turned to them uncertainly. “I have had rooms prepared, and you’ll find no lack of hot water to wash off the dust of the road. I hope you will honor us at table tonight,” He spoke the words so awkwardly that even Bran took note; it was a speech he had learned, not words from the heart, but the black brothers thanked him all the same.
四个守夜人留了下来。罗柏迟疑地转向他们。“我已经派人备好房间，以及足够的热水让你们洗净路上尘土。我衷心希望今晚能荣幸地与各位共进晚餐。”他这番话说得很怪，连布兰都听得出这是他特意背来，而非发自肺腑，但黑衣弟兄似乎不以为意，仍旧感谢他的好意。
Summer followed them up the tower steps as Hodor carried Bran back to his bed. Old Nan was asleep in her chair. Hodor said “Hodor,” gathered up his great-grandmother, and carried her off, snoring softly, while Bran lay thinking. Robb had promised that he could feast with the Night’s Watch in the Great Hall. “Summer,” he called. The wolf bounded up on the bed. Bran hugged him so hard he could feel the hot breath on his cheek. “I can ride now,” he whispered to his friend. “We can go hunting in the woods soon, wait and see.” After a time he slept.
阿多把布兰抱回床上，夏天跟着他们步上高塔楼梯。老奶妈已经坐在椅子上睡着了。阿多说：“阿多，”然后抱走轻轻打鼾的曾祖母。布兰躺着思考，罗柏刚才保证他可以和守夜人一起在大厅里吃晚餐。“夏天，”他唤道。小狼跳到床上，布兰用力地搂住它，直到小狼热呼呼的鼻息直冲脸颊。“我可以骑马了。”他对他的动物朋友说，“你等着瞧，我们很快就可以一起去森林打猎。”没过多久，他便睡着了。
In his dream he was climbing again, pulling himself up an ancient windowless tower, his fingers forcing themselves between blackened stones, his feet scrabbling for purchase. Higher and higher he climbed, through the clouds and into the night sky, and still the tower rose before him. When he paused to look down, his head swam dizzily and he felt his fingers slipping. Bran cried out and clung for dear life. The earth was a thousand miles beneath him and he could not fly. He could not fly . He waited until his heart had stopped pounding, until he could breathe, and he began to climb again. There was no way to go but up. Far above him, outlined against a vast pale moon, he thought he could see the shapes of gargoyles. His arms were sore and aching, but he dared not rest. He forced himself to climb faster. The gargoyles watched him ascend. Their eyes glowed red as hot coals in a brazier. Perhaps once they had been lions, but now they were twisted and grotesque. Bran could hear them whispering to each other in soft stone voices terrible to hear. He must not listen, he told himself, he must not hear, so long as he did not hear them he was safe. But when the gargoyles pulled themselves loose from the stone and padded down the side of the tower to where Bran clung, he knew he was not safe after all. “I didn’t hear,” he wept as they came closer and closer, “I didn’t, I didn’t.”
在梦中他再度攀爬，沿着一座年代久远，没有窗户的塔向上攀升，手指勾住焦黑的石块，双脚胡乱地寻找支撑。他越爬越高，穿越云层，进入夜空，但仍不见塔顶。当他停下来向下看去，只觉头晕目眩，手指滑落。他尖叫着死命胡抓。地面离他足足千里之遥，而他又不会飞。他根本就不会飞。他直等到心脏不再怦怦乱跳，呼吸也顺畅之后，才继续往上爬。除了向上，别无他途。上方极目处，映着偌大的惨白圆月，他隐约可以看到石像鬼的形影。他两臂酸麻，却不敢休息，反而逼自己加快速度。石像鬼看着他向上攀升，眼睛如火盆里烧红的煤炭般炯炯发亮。它们原本曾有狮子的形貌，如今却极尽扭曲怪诞之能事。布兰听见它们窃窃私语，石头发出的轻细声音分外骇人。他不该听的，他告诉自己，他不能听的，只要不听，就能确保自身安全。然而当众多石像鬼挣脱石座，往下朝布兰攀住的地方进逼时，他知道自己终究还是难逃一劫。“我不听，”眼看它们越靠越近，他哭起来。“我不听，不听。”
He woke gasping, lost in darkness, and saw a vast shadow looming over him. “I didn’t hear,” he whispered, trembling in fear, but then the shadow said “Hodor,” and lit the candle by the bedside, and Bran sighed with relief.
他喘着气惊醒，独处黑暗，只见一个硕大的黑影笼罩着他。“我不听，”他一边害怕地颤抖，一边低声说。这时黑影道：“阿多”，接着点亮床边的蜡烛，布兰总算安心地松了口气。
Hodor washed the sweat from him with a warm, damp cloth and dressed him with deft and gentle hands. When it was time, he carried him down to the Great Hall, where a long trestle table had been set up near the fire. The lord’s seat at the head of the table had been left empty, but Robb sat to the right of it, with Bran across from him. They ate suckling pig that night, and pigeon pie, and turnips soaking in butter, and afterward the cook had promised honeycombs. Summer snatched table scraps from Bran’s hand, while Grey Wind and Shaggydog fought over a bone in the corner. Winterfell’s dogs would not come near the hall now. Bran had found that strange at first, but he was growing used to it.
阿多用一块温热的湿布替他抹去一身冷汗，再灵巧温柔地为他换好衣服。等时间一到，便把他抱去大厅。厅里大火炉旁边已经架起长桌，领主的首座空着，罗柏坐在那个位子右边，布兰则在他对面。当晚他们吃了烤乳猪、鸽肉派，还有浸在奶油里的芜菁，厨子说饭后甜点是蜂窝。夏天从布兰手里叼走剩菜，灰风和毛毛狗则在角落里争夺一块骨头。临冬城的狗儿们现在已经不敢靠近饭厅，布兰起初还觉得奇怪，渐渐也就习以为常了。
Yoren was senior among the black brothers, so the steward had seated him between Robb and Maester Luwin. The old man had a sour smell, as if he had not washed in a long time. He ripped at the meat with his teeth, cracked the ribs to suck out the marrow from the bones, and shrugged at the mention of Jon Snow. “Ser Alliser’s bane,” he grunted, and two of his companions shared a laugh that Bran did not understand. But when Robb asked for news of their uncle Benjen, the black brothers grew ominously quiet.
尤伦是黑衫弟兄里最年长的一位，所以管家让他坐在罗柏和鲁温师傅之间。这老人身上有股酸味，似乎很久没洗过澡。他用牙齿大力撕咬猪肉，啃裂骨头，吸吮骨髓，听人提到琼恩·雪诺时则耸耸肩。“他是艾里沙爵士的心头大患。”他咕哝着说，他的两个同伴听了哈哈大笑，布兰却不明所以。但当罗柏问起他们班扬叔叔时，黑衣弟兄们立时都静了下来。
“What is it?” Bran asked.
“他到底怎样了嘛？”布兰问。
Yoren wiped his fingers on his vest. “There’s hard news, m’lords, and a cruel way to pay you for your meat and mead, but the man as asks the question must bear the answer. Stark’s gone.”
尤伦在背心上抹抹指头。“这消息恐怕不太好受，诸位大人，说出来实在对不起这顿丰盛晚餐，但既然问了，我就直说，史塔克他是回不来啦。”
One of the other men said, “The Old Bear sent him out to look for Waymar Royce, and he’s late returning, my lord.”
另一个人说：“熊老派他去找威玛·罗伊斯，不过他到现在还没回来哩，大人。”
“Too long,” Yoren said. “Most like he’s dead.”
“太久了，”尤伦说，“我看八成是死了。”
“My uncle is not dead,” Robb Stark said loudly, anger in his tones. He rose from the bench and laid his hand on the hilt of his sword. “Do you hear me? My uncle is not dead!” His voice rang against the stone walls, and Bran was suddenly afraid.
“我叔叔没死，”罗柏·史塔克高声道，话中充满愤怒。他从长凳上起身，伸手按住剑柄。“你听见没有？我叔叔没死！”他的声音响彻石室，布兰突然害怕起来。
Old sour-smelling Yoren looked up at Robb, unimpressed. “Whatever you say, m’lord,” he said. He sucked at a piece of meat between his teeth.
浑身酸臭的老尤伦抬头看看罗柏，不置可否地说：“大人您爱怎么说都成。”他边说边吮卡在牙缝间的肉。
The youngest of the black brothers shifted uncomfortably in his seat. “There’s not a man on the Wall knows the haunted forest better than Benjen Stark. He’ll find his way back.”
几位黑衣弟兄里最年轻的那个不自在地在座位上动了动。“长城上没有人比班扬·史塔克更熟悉鬼影森林。他应该能找到路回来。”
“Well,” said Yoren, “maybe he will and maybe he won’t. Good men have gone into those woods before, and never come out.”
“谁知道哩，”尤伦道：“或许能，或许不能。从前许多厉害角色到了森林也是一去不回。”
All Bran could think of was Old Nan’s story of the Others and the last hero, hounded through the white woods by dead men and spiders big as hounds. He was afraid for a moment, until he remembered how that story ended. “The children will help him,” he blurted, “the children of the forest!”
此刻布兰脑中所想只有老奶妈故事里的异鬼和最后的英雄，在白茫茫的森林里被死人和猎狗一般大的蜘蛛穷追不舍。半晌之间，他十分害怕，接着他突然想起故事的结局。“森林之子，”他脱口而出，“森林之子会帮助他的！”
Theon Greyjoy sniggered, and Maester Luwin said, “Bran, the children of the forest have been dead and gone for thousands of years. All that is left of them are the faces in the trees.”
席恩·葛雷乔伊暗自窃笑，鲁温师傅开口道：“布兰，森林之子早在几千年前便已销声匿迹。如今只剩下树上镂刻的脸。”
“Down here, might be that’s true, Maester,” Yoren said, “but up past the Wall, who’s to say? Up there, a man can’t always tell what’s alive and what’s dead.”
“老师傅，在这儿或许是这样没错，”尤伦说，“但出了长城，谁知道呢？在那儿，想分辨活人跟死人都不容易啊。”
That night, after the plates had been cleared, Robb carried Bran up to bed himself. Grey Wind led the way, and Summer came close behind. His brother was strong for his age, and Bran was as light as a bundle of rags, but the stairs were steep and dark, and Robb was breathing hard by the time they reached the top.
当天晚上，等碟盘收拾完毕，罗柏亲自把布兰抱回卧床。灰风领路在前，夏天紧随在后。以他的年龄，哥哥算是相当强壮，何况布兰轻得跟堆破布似的，然而楼梯又陡又暗，当他们终于走上塔顶，罗柏已经气喘吁吁。
He put Bran into bed, covered him with blankets, and blew out the candle. For a time Robb sat beside him in the dark. Bran wanted to talk to him, but he did not know what to say. “We’ll find a horse for you, I promise,” Robb whispered at last.
他把布兰放上床，为他盖上毯子，然后吹熄蜡烛。罗柏在黑暗中陪他坐了一会儿。布兰想跟他聊聊，却不知该说些什么。“我保证，一定会帮你找到合适的马。”最后罗柏低声说。
“Are they ever coming back?” Bran asked him.
“爸妈他们会回来吗？”布兰问他。
“Yes,” Robb said with such hope in his voice that Bran knew he was hearing his brother and not just Robb the Lord. “Mother will be home soon. Maybe we can ride out to meet her when she comes. Wouldn’t that surprise her, to see you ahorse?” Even in the dark room, Bran could feel his brother’s smile. “And afterward, we’ll ride north to see the Wall. We won’t even tell Jon we’re coming, we’ll just be there one day, you and me. It will be an adventure.”
“当然会。”罗柏的语气充满希望，布兰知道此刻和自己说话的是罗柏哥哥，而非罗柏城主。“母亲很快就会回来了。说不定我们可以一起骑马出城去迎接她哟。看到你骑在马上的英姿，她一定又惊又喜，对不对？”即使房间漆黑一团，布兰也能感觉哥哥的微笑。“然后咱俩可以往北骑，去看看长城。咱们先瞒着琼恩，你我两个哪天说走就走，跟出去冒险一样。”
“An adventure,” Bran repeated wistfully. He heard his brother sob. The room was so dark he could not see the tears on Robb’s face, so he reached out and found his hand. Their fingers twined together.
“出去冒险。”布兰渴望地复诵。他听见哥哥轻声啜泣。屋里太暗，看不到罗柏脸上的泪水，所以他伸出手找到哥哥的手，十根指头紧紧交握。
*EDDARD
第二十六章 奈德
“L ord Arryn’s death was a great sadness for all of us, my lord,” Grand Maester Pycelle said. “I would be more than happy to tell you what I can of the manner of his passing. Do be seated. Would you care for refreshments? Some dates, perhaps? I have some very fine persimmons as well. Wine no longer agrees with my digestion, I fear, but I can offer you a cup of iced milk, sweetened with honey. I find it most refreshing in this heat.”
“大人，艾林公爵的死对我们是个沉重的打击。”派席尔国师说，“我自然很乐意告诉您他过世的情形。请坐。您要不要吃些点心？来几颗枣子如何？我这儿还有些上好的柿子。我这把年纪虽然不能喝酒，倒是可以帮您弄杯冰牛奶，加过蜂蜜的。大热天里喝这个正合适。”
There was no denying the heat; Ned could feel the silk tunic clinging to his chest. Thick, moist air covered the city like a damp woolen blanket, and the riverside had grown unruly as the poor fled their hot, airless warrens to jostle for sleeping places near the water, where the only breath of wind was to be found. “That would be most kind,” Ned said, seating himself.
天气的确很热，奈德的丝质外衣贴紧前胸。空气郁窒而潮湿，像条湿羊毛毯般覆盖整个城市。穷人纷纷逃离他们闷热窒息的住所，想在河畔抢个位子歇息，只有那里才有些许微风，结果河边被挤得壅塞不堪。“那就谢谢您了。”奈德说着坐了下来。
Pycelle lifted a tiny silver bell with thumb and forefinger and tinkled it gently. A slender young serving girl hurried into the solar. “Iced milk for the King’s Hand and myself, if you would be so kind, child. Well sweetened.”
派席尔用拇指和食指拣起一个精巧的小银铃，轻轻摇了两下。一名清瘦的女侍急忙赶进来。“我的好孩子，请你帮首相大人和我各弄一杯冰牛奶，多加点蜂蜜。”
As the girl went to fetch their drinks, the Grand Maester knotted his fingers together and rested his hands on his stomach. “The smallfolk say that the last year of summer is always the hottest. It is not so, yet ofttimes it feels that way, does it not? On days like this, I envy you northerners your summer snows.” The heavy jeweled chain around the old man’s neck chinked softly as he shifted in his seat. “To be sure, King Maekar’s summer was hotter than this one, and near as long. There were fools, even in the Citadel, who took that to mean that the Great Summer had come at last, the summer that never ends, but in the seventh year it broke suddenly, and we had a short autumn and a terrible long winter. Still, the heat was fierce while it lasted. Oldtown steamed and sweltered by day and came alive only by night. We would walk in the gardens by the river and argue about the gods. I remember the smells of those nights, my lord—perfume and sweat, melons ripe to bursting, peaches and pomegranates, nightshade and moonbloom. I was a young man then, still forging my chain. The heat did not exhaust me as it does now.” Pycelle’s eyes were so heavily lidded he looked half-asleep. “My pardons, Lord Eddard. You did not come to hear foolish meanderings of a summer forgotten before your father was born. Forgive an old man his wanderings, if you would. Minds are like swords, I do fear. The old ones go to rust. Ah, and here is our milk.” The serving girl placed the tray between them, and Pycelle gave her a smile. “Sweet child.” He lifted a cup, tasted, nodded. “Thank you. You may go.”
女孩去取饮料之后，国师叉起指头，把手放在肚子上。“老百姓说夏天的最后一年是最热的年头。当然啦，这只是民间的说法，可有时候还真让人产生这种错觉，您说是不？每到这种天气，我就羡慕你们北方人还有夏雪。”老人脖子上挂的那串宝石项链随着他挪动身体而发出轻响。“远的不说，梅卡国王那时的夏天就比现在还热，持续时间也差不多。有些傻瓜还以为永不结束的‘永夏’已经降临，就连学城里也有这种人，结果呢？到得第七年突然就变了天，紧接着短短的秋天，就是恐怖而漫长的冬季。但无可否认，那时候还真是够热。旧镇上上下下热气四溢，暑气逼人，到了晚上才稍稍扭转。那时我们常在河滨花园里散步，一边争论各种宗教观点。首相大人，直到现在我还记得那些个夜晚的味道——香水、汗味，各种瓜果熟得快裂开，桃子与石榴，颠茄和月花。当时我还年轻，正在打造我的项链，再热都不以为意，哪像现在，受不了啰。”派席尔眼睑低垂，看上去仿佛就要睡着。“艾德大人，真对不住，您不是来听我絮絮叨叨什么早被遗忘的夏季的，当年连令尊都没出生呢。就请您多多包涵我这老人家的罗嗦罢。思想这东西，就跟宝剑一样，放久了自然就生锈喽。啊，我们的牛奶来了。”女侍在他们中间放上一个托盘，派席尔朝她微微一笑。“真是个好孩子。”他拿起一杯尝了两口，点点头。“谢谢你，你下去罢。”
When the girl had taken her leave, Pycelle peered at Ned through pale, rheumy eyes. “Now where were we? Oh, yes. You asked about Lord Arryn …”
女孩离开后，派席尔用他那双苍白而湿润的眼睛打量奈德，“我们说到哪儿了？噢，您问起艾林大人……”
“I did.” Ned sipped politely at the iced milk. It was pleasantly cold, but oversweet to his taste.
“是的。”奈德很有礼貌地啜着牛奶，冰凉凉的很爽口，只是对他而言太甜了。
“If truth be told, the Hand had not seemed quite himself for some time,” Pycelle said. “We had sat together on council many a year, he and I, and the signs were there to read, but I put them down to the great burdens he had borne so faithfully for so long. Those broad shoulders were weighed down by all the cares of the realm, and more besides. His son was ever sickly, and his lady wife so anxious that she would scarcely let the boy out of her sight. It was enough to weary even a strong man, and the Lord Jon was not young. Small wonder if he seemed melancholy and tired. Or so I thought at the time. Yet now I am less certain.” He gave a ponderous shake of his head.
“说实话，前首相大人之前就常常心神不宁。”派席尔道，“我和他共事这么多年，还有什么征兆看不出来？我认为这是来源于他长久以来默默承受的重责大任。他那对宽阔的肩膀都快被国家大事和别的心事给压垮了。尤其是他儿子身体孱弱，夫人为此忧心忡忡，几乎不敢让他离开视线范围。这样的压力连身强体壮的人尚且难以负荷，何况琼恩大人他年纪也已不轻。若他为此身心俱疲，实在不足为奇。至少我当时是这样想的。现在我却不敢妄下断论。”他若有所思地摇摇头。
“What can you tell me of his final illness?”
“他到底生了什么病？”
The Grand Maester spread his hands in a gesture of helpless sorrow. “He came to me one day asking after a certain book, as hale and healthy as ever, though it did seem to me that something was troubling him deeply. The next morning he was twisted over in pain, too sick to rise from bed. Maester Colemon thought it was a chill on the stomach. The weather had been hot, and the Hand often iced his wine, which can upset the digestion. When Lord Jon continued to weaken, I went to him myself, but the gods did not grant me the power to save him.”
国师摊开手，做出无可奈何的悲伤姿势。“有天他来找我要一本书，身子骨和平时一样，硬朗得没话说，但我看得出他心头在挂虑什么。隔天早晨，他便周身疼痛，连床也起不来了。柯蒙学士认为他只是肠胃受了寒，这些日子天气热，首相大人常在葡萄酒里加冰块，很有可能影响消化。然而琼恩大人的病情却持续恶化，于是我亲自出马，只是诸神不肯赐予我拯救他的力量。”
“I have heard that you sent Maester Colemon away.”
“听说您当时把柯蒙师傅给遣开了。”
The Grand Maester’s nod was as slow and deliberate as a glacier. “I did, and I fear the Lady Lysa will never forgive me that. Maybe I was wrong, but at the time I thought it best. Maester Colemon is like a son to me, and I yield to none in my esteem for his abilities, but he is young, and the young ofttimes do not comprehend the frailty of an older body. He was purging Lord Arryn with wasting potions and pepper juice, and I feared he might kill him.”
大学士慢慢而郑重地点了点头，有如缓缓流动的冰河。“是啊，只怕莱莎夫人永远也不会原谅我。或许我做得不对，然而当时我觉得这是最好的选择。我把柯蒙师傅当自己儿子一般看待，对他的能力我也绝对有信心，然而他太年轻，年轻人往往无法体会老年人的身体有多虚弱。他让艾林大人喝下清肠剂和胡椒液，本意是想呕出毒素，怕只怕这反而会害了公爵。”
“Did Lord Arryn say anything to you during his final hours?”
“艾林大人病危时跟您说过些什么？”
Pycelle wrinkled his brow. “In the last stage of his fever, the Hand called out the name Robert several times, but whether he was asking for his son or for the king I could not say. Lady Lysa would not permit the boy to enter the sickroom, for fear that he too might be taken ill. The king did come, and he sat beside the bed for hours, talking and joking of times long past in hopes of raising Lord Jon’s spirits. His love was fierce to see.”
派席尔皱起眉头，“在他最后高烧弥留的阶段，首相大人多次高呼‘劳勃’这个名字，我不确定他是叫他的爱子还是国王陛下。莱莎夫人不准孩子进病房，怕他被传染。国王陛下倒是来过，在病床边坐了好长时间，跟琼恩大人谈起往日的美好时光，希望能提振他的精神。他对前首相的敬爱非常明显。”
“Was there nothing else? No final words?”
“没有别的吗？没有遗言？”
“When I saw that all hope had fled, I gave the Hand the milk of the poppy, so he should not suffer. Just before he closed his eyes for the last time, he whispered something to the king and his lady wife, a blessing for his son. The seed is strong , he said. At the end, his speech was too slurred to comprehend. Death did not come until the next morning, but Lord Jon was at peace after that. He never spoke again.”
“我眼看首相大人康复无望，便给他喝了罂粟花奶，好让他不再受苦。他在阖眼之前，向夫人和国王陛下说了句为爱子祈福的话。他说‘种性强韧’。末了，他的吐词已经含糊不清，难辨其意。虽然隔天清晨人才故去，但琼恩大人在那之后已经平静下来，没再开口。”
Ned took another swallow of milk, trying not to gag on the sweetness of it. “Did it seem to you that there was anything unnatural about Lord Arryn’s death?”
奈德又喝了口牛奶，努力忍受腻人的甜味。“那，依您之见，琼恩·艾林大人的死有无蹊跷？”
“Unnatural?” The aged maester’s voice was thin as a whisper. “No, I could not say so. Sad, for a certainty. Yet in its own way, death is the most natural thing of all, Lord Eddard. Jon Arryn rests easy now, his burdens lifted at last.”
“有无蹊跷？”老师傅的声音轻得像是悄悄话，“不，我认为没有。艾德大人，死亡固然令人悲伤，但从另一方面讲，却也是最自然不过的事。琼恩·艾林大人如今已卸下所有重担，长眠于地底了。”
“This illness that took him,” said Ned. “Had you ever seen its like before, in other men?”
“夺走他性命的这种病，”艾德说，“您以前见过吗？在其他病人身上？”
“Near forty years I have been Grand Maester of the Seven Kingdoms,” Pycelle replied. “Under our good King Robert, and Aerys Targaryen before him, and his father Jaehaerys the Second before him, and even for a few short months under Jaehaerys’s father, Aegon the Fortunate, the Fifth of His Name. I have seen more of illness than I care to remember, my lord. I will tell you this: Every case is different, and every case is alike. Lord Jon’s death was no stranger than any other.”
“我做七国的国师已近四十年，”派席尔回答，“服侍过我们的好国王劳勃，在他之前的伊里斯·坦格利安，伊里斯的父亲杰赫里斯二世，甚至还在杰赫里斯的父亲‘幸运的’伊耿五世手下做过几个月。首相大人，我见过的疾病不胜枚举，让我告诉您罢：每种疾病虽不一样，却都有共通之处。琼恩大人的死并不比其他人来得离奇。”
“His wife thought otherwise.”
“他的夫人可不这么认为。”
The Grand Maester nodded. “I recall now, the widow is sister to your own noble wife. If an old man may be forgiven his blunt speech, let me say that grief can derange even the strongest and most disciplined of minds, and the Lady Lysa was never that. Since her last stillbirth, she has seen enemies in every shadow, and the death of her lord husband left her shattered and lost.”
国师点点头。“我想起来了，他的遗孀是尊夫人的妹妹。如果您不嫌我这老人家说话莽撞，容我这么说，即便最坚强、最自制的人，往往也容易被悲伤所影响，何况莱莎夫人本不是那样的人。她自上次流产之后，便疑神疑鬼，处处以为有人要与她为敌，想必首相大人的死让她心都碎了。”
“So you are quite certain that Jon Arryn died of a sudden illness?”
“所以你确信琼恩·艾林死于突发性疾病？”
“I am,” Pycelle replied gravely. “If not illness, my good lord, what else could it be?”
“是的。”派席尔沉重地回答，“若非疾病，我的好大人，还会是什么呢？”
“Poison,” Ned suggested quietly.
“毒药。”奈德静静地提示。
Pycelle’s sleepy eyes flicked open. The aged maester shifted uncomfortably in his seat. “A disturbing thought. We are not the Free Cities, where such things are common. Grand Maester Aethelmure wrote that all men carry murder in their hearts, yet even so, the poisoner is beneath contempt.” He fell silent for a moment, his eyes lost in thought. “What you suggest is possible, my lord, yet I do not think it likely. Every hedge maester knows the common poisons, and Lord Arryn displayed none of the signs. And the Hand was loved by all. What sort of monster in man’s flesh would dare to murder such a noble lord?”
派席尔的惺忪睡眼猛地睁大，这位老师傅不安地在座位上挪动身子。“这想法真叫人不寒而栗。我们并非身在自由贸易城邦，只有在那里，这种事才是家常便饭。虽说伊萨穆尔国师提醒我们每个人心里都有谋杀的种子，即便如此，下毒还是太令人不齿。”他沉默了一会儿，眼神若有所思。“大人，您所提出的这种可能性，我认为不存在。随便雇一个乡野学士都能看出常见的中毒症状，艾林大人却没有任何类似迹象。更何况人人都爱戴首相大人，怎么会有禽兽胆敢毒害如此高贵的好人呢？”
“I have heard it said that poison is a woman’s weapon.”
“我倒听说毒药是女人的武器。”
Pycelle stroked his beard thoughtfully. “It is said. Women, cravens … and eunuchs.” He cleared his throat and spat a thick glob of phlegm onto the rushes. Above them, a raven cawed loudly in the rookery. “The Lord Varys was born a slave in Lys, did you know? Put not your trust in spiders, my lord.”
派席尔沉吟着捻胡须。“是有这种说法。包括女人、懦夫……还有太监。”他清清喉咙，朝草席吐口浓痰。在他们头顶上方，有只乌鸦在巢里大声怪叫。“您可知道，瓦里斯伯爵原本是里斯的奴隶？大人，千万不能信任蜘蛛啊。”
That was scarcely anything Ned needed to be told; there was something about Varys that made his flesh crawl. “I will remember that, Maester. And I thank you for your help. I have taken enough of your time.” He stood.
这话奈德不用他提醒，瓦里斯有种能让他浑身起鸡皮疙瘩的本事。“我会记住的，师傅。谢谢您的协助，只怕我已经占用您太多时间了。”他站起身。
Grand Maester Pycelle pushed himself up from his chair slowly and escorted Ned to the door. “I hope I have helped in some small way to put your mind at ease. If there is any other service I might perform, you need only ask.”
派席尔国师缓缓推开椅子，送奈德到门边。“希望我这一点绵薄之力能让您安心。如果还有别的地方帮得上忙，您尽管开口。”
“One thing,” Ned told him. “I should be curious to examine the book that you lent Jon the day before he fell ill.”
“还有一件事，”奈德对他说，“我对琼恩生病前天跟您借的那本书很好奇，不知可否拿来一阅？”
“I fear you would find it of little interest,” Pycelle said. “It was a ponderous tome by Grand Maester Malleon on the lineages of the great houses.”
“恐怕您会觉得很无趣，”派席尔道，“那是梅利恩国师所写的一本大部头，里面讲的全是各大家族的历代谱系。”
“Still, I should like to see it.”
“没关系，我只想看看。”
The old man opened the door. “As you wish. I have it here somewhere. When I find it, I shall have it sent to your chambers straightaway.”
老人打开门。“如您所愿，我好像就放在这哪儿，总之书一找到，我即刻差人送到您房间去。”
“You have been most courteous,” Ned told him. Then, almost as an afterthought, he said, “One last question, if you would be so kind. You mentioned that the king was at Lord Arryn’s bedside when he died. I wonder, was the queen with him?”
“您真是太周到了。”奈德告诉他。接着，他像突然想到什么似地说，“请您见谅，我还有最后一个问题。您刚才说艾林大人临终时国王在他床边，呃，不知当时王后在不在场？”
“Why, no,” Pycelle said. “She and the children were making the journey to Casterly Rock, in company with her father. Lord Tywin had brought a retinue to the city for the tourney on Prince Joffrey’s name day, no doubt hoping to see his son Jaime win the champion’s crown. In that he was sadly disappointed. It fell to me to send the queen word of Lord Arryn’s sudden death. Never have I sent off a bird with a heavier heart.”
“唉，不在哪。”派席尔说，“当时她正带着公主王子，陪着她父亲，前往凯岩城。先前泰温大人带上大队人马前来都城参加乔佛里王子的命名日比武大会，无疑是想看他儿子詹姆赢得冠军，可惜没能如愿。通知王后陛下艾林大人死讯的事，便落到了我身上。我这辈子从没有怀着如此沉重的心情送出一只鸟儿。”
“Dark wings, dark words,” Ned murmured. It was a proverb Old Nan had taught him as a boy.
“黑色的翅膀，带来黑色的消息。”奈德喃喃道。这是小时候老奶妈教他的一句谚语。
“So the fishwives say,” Grand Maester Pycelle agreed, “but we know it is not always so. When Maester Luwin’s bird brought the word about your Bran, the message lifted every true heart in the castle, did it not?”
“民间是这么说的，”派席尔总师同意，“但我们知道也不尽然。鲁温学士的鸟儿捎来贵公子布兰的好消息时，可不是让城里每个人都欢欣雀跃么？”
“As you say, Maester.”
“大学士，您说得对。”
“The gods are merciful.” Pycelle bowed his head. “Come to me as often as you like, Lord Eddard. I am here to serve.”
“诸神慈悲，”派席尔点点头。“艾德大人，有什么事请尽管来找我，我随时听候差遣。”
Yes , Ned thought as the door swung shut, but whom?
是啊，奈德在门关上时想着，但是听候谁的差遣呢？
On the way back to his chambers, he came upon his daughter Arya on the winding steps of the Tower of the Hand, windmilling her arms as she struggled to balance on one leg. The rough stone had scuffed her bare feet. Ned stopped and looked at her. “Arya, what are you doing?”
回房途中，他见到女儿艾莉亚单脚站在首相塔的螺旋梯上，两手不断挥舞保持平衡。粗糙的石地面磨破了她的脚丫。奈德停下来看她。“艾莉亚，你这是在做什么？”
“Syrio says a water dancer can stand on one toe for hours.” Her hands flailed at the air to steady herself.
“西利欧说水舞者可以用一只脚趾站好几个小时。”她两手在空中拚命挥舞，以保持平衡。
Ned had to smile. “Which toe?” he teased.
奈德忍俊不禁。“哪只脚趾头？”他揶揄道。
“Any toe,” Arya said, exasperated with the question. She hopped from her right leg to her left, swaying dangerously before she regained her balance.
“随便哪一只都可以。”艾莉亚为这个问题而恼怒。她从右脚跳到左脚，颤巍巍地来回晃动，最后才重新找到平衡。
“Must you do your standing here?” he asked. “It’s a long hard fall down these steps.”
“你非站在这里不可？”他问，“又高又陡，跌下去可不好玩。”
“Syrio says a water dancer never falls.” She lowered her leg to stand on two feet. “Father, will Bran come and live with us now?”
“西利欧说水舞者绝不会跌倒。”她放下脚，两腿站立。“爸爸，布兰现在会来跟我们一起住了吗？”
“Not for a long time, sweet one,” he told her. “He needs to win his strength back.”
“恐怕要等一段时间，小宝贝。”他对她说，“他得先恢复体力才成。”
Arya bit her lip. “What will Bran do when he’s of age?”
艾莉亚咬咬嘴唇。“布兰长大以后要做什么呢？”
Ned knelt beside her. “He has years to find that answer, Arya. For now, it is enough to know that he will live.” The night the bird had come from Winterfell, Eddard Stark had taken the girls to the castle godswood, an acre of elm and alder and black cottonwood overlooking the river. The heart tree there was a great oak, its ancient limbs overgrown with smokeberry vines; they knelt before it to offer their thanksgiving, as if it had been a weirwood. Sansa drifted to sleep as the moon rose, Arya several hours later, curling up in the grass under Ned’s cloak. All through the dark hours he kept his vigil alone. When dawn broke over the city, the dark red blooms of dragon’s breath surrounded the girls where they lay. “I dreamed of Bran,” Sansa had whispered to him. “I saw him smiling.”
“艾莉亚，他有好多年的时间来寻找答案。而现在，我们只要知道他会活下去就好了。”鸟儿从临冬城捎来讯息的那天晚上，艾德·史塔克带着女儿们来到城堡的神木林。那是片足有一亩之广的森林，种满榆树、柏树和黑色三叶杨，俯瞰着河流。那里的心树是棵大橡木，古老的枝干上爬满烟莓藤蔓，他们在树前跪下感谢神灵，一如在家乡的鱼梁木底。待到月亮升起，珊莎已经睡着，艾莉亚则多撑了几个小时，最后也蜷缩在草地上，盖着奈德的斗篷沉沉睡去。漫漫长夜，他独自静默祷告。翌日清晨，天光乍现，只见龙息草暗红色的花围绕着两个躺卧的女儿。“我梦见了布兰喔，”珊莎偷偷对他说，“还看见他笑呢。”
“He was going to be a knight,” Arya was saying now. “A knight of the Kingsguard. Can he still be a knight?”
“他以后会当上骑士，”这会儿艾莉亚说，“当上御林铁卫的骑士。他还能当骑士吗？”
“No,” Ned said. He saw no use in lying to her. “Yet someday he may be the lord of a great holdfast and sit on the king’s council. He might raise castles like Brandon the Builder, or sail a ship across the Sunset Sea, or enter your mother’s Faith and become the High Septon.” But he will never run beside his wolf again , he thought with a sadness too deep for words, or lie with a woman, or hold his own son in his arms .
“不行。”奈德自觉说谎无益。“有朝一日他或能身居高位，成为国王的重臣。他可能会像‘筑城者’布兰登那样兴建城堡，可能乘船横渡日落之海，或是皈依你母亲的信仰，当上总主教。”然而他再也不能和他的狼一并奔驰，他沉痛地想，这悲伤无言可喻，他也无法和女人同床共枕、抱着自己亲生孩儿了。
Arya cocked her head to one side. “Can I be a king’s councillor and build castles and become the High Septon?”
艾莉亚歪着头。“那我可以当国王的重臣，盖城堡，当大主教吗？”
“You,” Ned said, kissing her lightly on the brow, “will marry a king and rule his castle, and your sons will be knights and princes and lords and, yes, perhaps even a High Septon.”
“你啊，”奈德说着轻轻吻了她的眉毛。“你会嫁给某个国王，管理他的城堡，你的儿子们则会当上骑士、王子或领主，或许也能当上大主教。”
Arya screwed up her face. “No,” she said, “that’s Sansa.” She folded up her right leg and resumed her balancing. Ned sighed and left her there.
艾莉亚脸色一变。“不要，”她说，“珊莎才会那样。”她右脚离地，继续练习单脚平衡。奈德叹了口气，留下她走了。
Inside his chambers, he stripped off his sweat-stained silks and sluiced cold water over his head from the basin beside the bed. Alyn entered as he was drying his face. “My lord,” he said, “Lord Baelish is without and begs audience.”
进到房间，他脱下汗水浸湿的丝质上衣，从床边的水盆里掬起冷水当头淋下。正当他擦脸的时候，埃林进来说：“老爷，贝里席大人在外求见。”
“Escort him to my solar,” Ned said, reaching for a fresh tunic, the lightest linen he could find. “I’ll see him at once.”
“把他请到我书房去。”奈德边说边伸手拿起他质料最薄的亚麻布干衣。“我马上就来。”
Littlefinger was perched on the window seat when Ned entered, watching the knights of the Kingsguard practice at swords in the yard below. “If only old Selmy’s mind were as nimble as his blade,” he said wistfully, “our council meetings would be a good deal livelier.”
当奈德跨进书房，发现小指头正坐在窗边，望着在下方广场练剑的御林铁卫。“老赛尔弥的脑袋瓜要跟他的剑一样灵光就好了，”他满怀渴望地说，“那样开会会有趣许多。”
“Ser Barristan is as valiant and honorable as any man in King’s Landing.” Ned had come to have a deep respect for the aged, white-haired Lord Commander of the Kingsguard.
“巴利斯坦爵士的武勇和操守，不输给君临的任何人。”经过这些日子的相处，奈德对这位德高望重，白发苍苍的御林铁卫队长抱持着崇高的敬意。
“And as tiresome,” Littlefinger added, “though I daresay he should do well in the tourney. Last year he unhorsed the Hound, and it was only four years ago that he was champion.”
“他的死气沉沉也同样不落人后。”小指头补充道，“不过我相信他在比武大会上应该还能老当益壮，发挥余热。去年他把猎狗一枪刺下马，距离他上次摘下冠军也不过四年。”
The question of who might win the tourney interested Eddard Stark not in the least. “Is there a reason for this visit, Lord Petyr, or are you here simply to enjoy the view from my window?”
对于谁会夺得比武大会冠军，艾德·史塔克一点兴趣也没有。“培提尔大人，请问您这次来访有何目的，还是单只来欣赏我窗边景致？”
Littlefinger smiled. “I promised Cat I would help you in your inquiries, and so I have.”
小指头微笑：“我答应凯特帮你明查暗访，而我说到做到。”
That took Ned aback. Promise or no promise, he could not find it in him to trust Lord Petyr Baelish, who struck him as too clever by half. “You have something for me?”
奈德大感意外。不论对方有无承诺，他都不打算相信培提尔·贝里席伯爵，他的机灵狡诈让他很不习惯。“你查到了什么事？”
“Someone,” Littlefinger corrected. “Four someones, if truth be told. Had you thought to question the Hand’s servants?”
“我查到的是人，不是事。”小指头纠正他。“事实上，是四个人。你有没有想过去盘查首相的仆人？”
Ned frowned. “Would that I could. Lady Arryn took her household back to the Eyrie.” Lysa had done him no favor in that regard. All those who had stood closest to her husband had gone with her when she fled: Jon’s maester, his steward, the captain of his guard, his knights and retainers.
奈德皱眉道：“如果我能就好了。艾林夫人把她全家上下都带回了鹰巢城。”在这方面莱莎一点忙也没帮上，所有跟她丈夫亲近的人都随她一道逃走：包括琼恩的学士、总管、侍卫队长，以及手下的骑士和仆从。
“Most of her household,” Littlefinger said, “not all. A few remain. A pregnant kitchen girl hastily wed to one of Lord Renly’s grooms, a stablehand who joined the City Watch, a potboy discharged from service for theft, and Lord Arryn’s squire.”
“不对，是大部分的人，”小指头说，“并非全部。有几个人留了下来。有个肚子被搞大的厨房小妹匆匆忙忙跟蓝礼大人的马夫成了亲，一个马僮加入了都城守卫队，一个跑堂小弟因为偷窃被炒了鱿鱼，留下来的还有艾林大人的侍从。”
“His squire?” Ned was pleasantly surprised. A man’s squire often knew a great deal of his comings and goings.
“他的侍从？”奈德喜出望外，做侍从的对主子的进出动向往往一清二楚。
“Ser Hugh of the Vale,” Littlefinger named him. “The king knighted the boy after Lord Arryn’s death.”
“峡谷的修夫爵士，”小指头说出他的名字，“艾林大人死后，国王封那小子做了骑士。”
“I shall send for him,” Ned said. “And the others.”
“我这就找他来，”奈德说，“还有其他人。”
Littlefinger winced. “My lord, step over here to the window, if you would be so kind.”
小指头畏缩着说：“大人，劳烦您，悄悄地走到窗边。”
“Why?”
“做什么？”
“Come, and I’ll show you, my lord.”
“过来罢，大人，我让您瞧瞧。”
Frowning, Ned crossed to the window. Petyr Baelish made a casual gesture. “There, across the yard, at the door of the armory, do you see the boy squatting by the steps honing a sword with an oilstone?”
奈德皱起眉头，走到窗边。培提尔·贝里席若无其事地做了个手势。“那儿，广场过去，兵器库门口，您可看见一个蹲在楼梯上磨刀的小子？”
“What of him?”
“他怎么了？”
“He reports to Varys. The Spider has taken a great interest in you and all your doings.” He shifted in the window seat. “Now glance at the wall. Farther west, above the stables. The guardsman leaning on the ramparts?”
“他是瓦里斯的眼线。‘八爪蜘蛛’对您的一举一动都很有兴趣。”他在窗边动了动。“现在再瞧瞧城墙上，西边最远处，马厩上面，有没有看见那个靠在墙上的守卫？”
Ned saw the man. “Another of the eunuch’s whisperers?”
奈德看到了。“这人也是太监的走狗？”
“No, this one belongs to the queen. Notice that he enjoys a fine view of the door to this tower, the better to note who calls on you. There are others, many unknown even to me. The Red Keep is full of eyes. Why do you think I hid Cat in a brothel?”
“不，这家伙是王后的人。请您注意，他的视线正好落在这座塔的门上，谁进谁出一清二楚。他们俩远不是全部，很多连我都不知晓。红堡里到处是各种眼线。否则我干嘛把凯特藏在妓院？”
Eddard Stark had no taste for these intrigues. “Seven hells,” he swore. It did seem as though the man on the walls was watching him. Suddenly uncomfortable, Ned moved away from the window. “Is everyone someone’s informer in this cursed city?”
艾德·史塔克对这种种机心巧诈颇感不耐。“天杀的，”他咒道。城墙上那个人看起来的确像在监视他。奈德顿时觉得浑身不自在，既便离开窗边。“难道这该死的城里每个人都是别人的眼线？”
“Scarcely,” said Littlefinger. He counted on the fingers on his hand. “Why, there’s me, you, the king … although, come to think on it, the king tells the queen much too much, and I’m less than certain about you.” He stood up. “Is there a man in your service that you trust utterly and completely?”
“那可不，”小指头说。他开始掰手指。“唉，让我算算，他们得监视我、你、国王……不过国王把太多事都告诉了王后，而我对你更不敢放心。”他站起来。“你手下可有让你完全、彻底地信任的人？”
“Yes,” said Ned.
“有。”奈德回答。
“In that case, I have a delightful palace in Valyria that I would dearly love to sell you,” Littlefinger said with a mocking smile. “The wiser answer was no , my lord, but be that as it may. Send this paragon of yours to Ser Hugh and the others. Your own comings and goings will be noted, but even Varys the Spider cannot watch every man in your service every hour of the day.” He started for the door.
“若真是如此，那我还有一座建在瓦雷利亚，爱不释手的漂亮皇宫想卖给您呢。”小指头一脸嘲讽地笑道，“聪明的回答是：没有，大人，不过既然说了就算了。您得派您这位模范部下去找修夫爵士和其他人，因为您自己的行踪会引人注目，但就算‘八爪蜘蛛’瓦里斯也没法无时无刻、成天盯住你的每位手下。”他朝门走去。
“Lord Petyr,” Ned called after him. “I … am grateful for your help. Perhaps I was wrong to distrust you.”
“培提尔大人，”奈德叫住他，“我……很感激你的鼎力相助。或许我不应该不信任你。”
Littlefinger fingered his small pointed beard. “You are slow to learn, Lord Eddard. Distrusting me was the wisest thing you’ve done since you climbed down off your horse.”
小指头轻捻胡须：“艾德大人，您实在学得太慢。不信任我，是你跳下马背以来所做过的最明智的事。”
*JON
第二十七章 琼恩
J on was showing Dareon how best to deliver a sidestroke when the new recruit entered the practice yard. “Your feet should be farther apart,” he urged. “You don’t want to lose your balance. That’s good. Now pivot as you deliver the stroke, get all your weight behind the blade.”
那个新兵走进训练场时，琼恩正在向戴利恩示范侧劈的诀窍。“两脚要张开一点，”他叮嘱道，“以免重心不稳，对，就是这样。出手的时候身体旋转，把全部的重心放在剑上。”
Dareon broke off and lifted his visor. “Seven gods,” he murmured. “Would you look at this, Jon.”
戴利恩停了下来，掀开面罩。“诸神在上，”他喃喃道，“琼恩，你快瞧瞧。”
Jon turned. Through the eye slit of his helm, he beheld the fattest boy he had ever seen standing in the door of the armory. By the look of him, he must have weighed twenty stone. The fur collar of his embroidered surcoat was lost beneath his chins. Pale eyes moved nervously in a great round moon of a face, and plump sweaty fingers wiped themselves on the velvet of his doublet. “They … they told me I was to come here for … for training,” he said to no one in particular.
琼恩转身，隔着头盔的细窄眼缝，他看到了他平生所见最为肥胖的男孩站在兵器库门口。单凭目测，他大概有二十石重，肥大的下巴完全遮掩住刺绣外套的绒毛领口，圆滚滚的月亮脸上一对苍白的眼睛局促地四下转动，汗水淋漓的肥胖指头则在天鹅绒上衣上揩个不停。“他……他们叫我来这边……受训。”他不确定地道。
“A lordling,” Pyp observed to Jon. “Southron, most like near Highgarden.” Pyp had traveled the Seven Kingdoms with a mummers’ troupe, and bragged that he could tell what you were and where you’d been born just from the sound of your voice.
“公子哥儿一个，”派普对琼恩说，“南方来的，八成是高庭一带的人。”派普曾经跟着戏班走遍七国全境，自称凭口音便能分辨别人来自何方，操什么营生。
A striding huntsman had been worked in scarlet thread upon the breast of the fat boy’s fur-trimmed surcoat. Jon did not recognize the sigil. Ser Alliser Thorne looked over his new charge and said, “It would seem they have run short of poachers and thieves down south. Now they send us pigs to man the Wall. Is fur and velvet your notion of armor, my Lord of Ham?”
胖男孩穿着绒毛滚边的外套，胸前用鲜红丝线绣着一个大跨步的猎人。琼恩不认得这个家徽。只见艾里沙·索恩爵士望了望他的新手下说：“看来这年头南方连盗猎者和小偷都人手短缺，这会儿倒把猪送来防守长城啦。我说火腿大人，这身毛皮和天鹅绒敢情就是您的铠甲了？”
It was soon revealed that the new recruit had brought his own armor with him; padded doublet, boiled leather, mail and plate and helm, even a great wood-and-leather shield blazoned with the same striding huntsman he wore on his surcoat. As none of it was black, however, Ser Alliser insisted that he reequip himself from the armory. That took half the morning. His girth required Donal Noye to take apart a mail hauberk and refit it with leather panels at the sides. To get a helm over his head the armorer had to detach the visor. His leathers bound so tightly around his legs and under his arms that he could scarcely move. Dressed for battle, the new boy looked like an overcooked sausage about to burst its skin. “Let us hope you are not as inept as you look,” Ser Alliser said. “Halder, see what Ser Piggy can do.”
众人很快便发现这新兵自己带来了全套行头：加衬垫的上衣，煮过的硬皮甲，铁铠和头盔，还有个包皮的大木盾，上面同样刻着他衣服上那个健步猎人纹章。由于这身装备没一件是黑的，艾里沙爵士便坚持要那新兵到武器库去换一套。这一换就是半早上。因为他的腰围太粗，唐纳·诺伊只好拆开整件胸甲，再帮他前后套上，两边用皮绳捆住。为了帮他戴上头盔，面罩便保不住。他的皮护手和绑腿紧紧地绑在四肢上，使他几乎动弹不得。全副武装之后，新来的小子看起来活像条煮得过熟的香肠，随时可能爆开。“希望你不像看起来那么不中用，”艾里沙爵士道，“霍德，试试猪头爵士有多厉害。”
Jon Snow winced. Halder had been born in a quarry and apprenticed as a stonemason. He was sixteen, tall and muscular, and his blows were as hard as any Jon had ever felt. “This will be uglier than a whore’s ass,” Pyp muttered, and it was.
琼恩·雪诺听了立刻皱起眉头。霍德在采石场里出生，当过石匠的学徒，今年十六岁，高大又结实，打起人来下手很重，琼恩还没尝过更厉害的拳头。“这下有人要他妈的倒大霉了。”派普喃喃道，事情果真如他所料。
The fight lasted less than a minute before the fat boy was on the ground, his whole body shaking as blood leaked through his shattered helm and between his pudgy fingers. “I yield,” he shrilled. “No more, I yield, don’t hit me.” Rast and some of the other boys were laughing.
打斗不到一分钟就告结束。胖子倒在地上，血从碎掉的头盔和肥短的手指间流出来，他全身都在颤抖。“我投降，”他尖叫，“别打了，我投降，不要打我。”雷斯特和其他几个男孩哄笑成一团。
Even then, Ser Alliser would not call an end. “On your feet, Ser Piggy,” he called. “Pick up your sword.” When the boy continued to cling to the ground, Thorne gestured to Halder. “Hit him with the flat of your blade until he finds his feet.” Halder delivered a tentative smack to his foe’s upraised cheeks. “You can hit harder than that,” Thorne taunted. Halder took hold of his longsword with both hands and brought it down so hard the blow split leather, even on the flat. The new boy screeched in pain.
即便如此，艾里沙爵士还是不肯罢休。“猪头爵士，给我起来，”他叫道，“把剑捡起来。”眼看胖子还是躺在地上，索恩向霍德示意，“拿剑脊揍他，直到他爬起来为止。”霍德试探性地敲敲对手仰高的脸颊。“你该不会就这点力气罢？”索恩讥讽。霍德于是双手持剑，狠狠地砍将下去，力道之猛，虽然是用剑脊，皮甲还是应声破裂。新兵痛苦地哀嚎。
Jon Snow took a step forward. Pyp laid a mailed hand on his arm. “Jon, no,” the small boy whispered with an anxious glance at Ser Alliser Thorne.
琼恩跨前一步，派普忙伸出戴护套的手抓住他。“琼恩，不要冲动。”小个子一边紧张地瞄了艾里沙·索恩爵士一眼，一边悄声对他说。
“On your feet,” Thorne repeated. The fat boy struggled to rise, slipped, and fell heavily again. “Ser Piggy is starting to grasp the notion,” Ser Alliser observed. “Again.”
“还不快给我起来。”索恩又说。胖男孩挣扎着想起身，谁知竟滑了一跤，又重重地摔倒在地。“猪头爵士有进步啰。”艾里沙爵士说，“再打。”
Halder lifted the sword for another blow. “Cut us off a ham!” Rast urged, laughing.
霍德举起剑准备继续。“给我们切块火腿唷！”雷斯特狞笑着催促他。
Jon shook off Pyp’s hand. “Halder, enough.”
琼恩甩开派普的手。“霍德，够了。”
Halder looked to Ser Alliser.
霍德转头去看艾里沙爵士。
“The Bastard speaks and the peasants tremble,” the master-at-arms said in that sharp, cold voice of his. “I remind you that I am the master-at-arms here, Lord Snow.”
“野种出来为农民打抱不平啦？”教头用他那尖锐而冷酷的声音说，“雪诺大人，你别忘了，我才是这里的头儿。”
“Look at him, Halder,” Jon urged, ignoring Thorne as best he could. “There’s no honor in beating a fallen foe. He yielded.” He knelt beside the fat boy.
“霍德，你看看他，”琼恩劝促道，故意不理睬索恩。“人家都投降了，你这样趁火打劫有什么意义？”他在胖子身旁蹲了下来。
Halder lowered his sword. “He yielded,” he echoed.
霍德放下剑。“他投降了，”他跟着重复。
Ser Alliser’s onyx eyes were fixed on Jon Snow. “It would seem our Bastard is in love,” he said as Jon helped the fat boy to his feet. “Show me your steel, Lord Snow.”
艾里沙爵士黑玛瑙似的眼睛紧紧盯着琼恩·雪诺不放。“我说哪，原来咱们野种谈恋爱啦。”他边看着琼恩扶起胖子边说，“雪诺大人，亮剑。”
Jon drew his longsword. He dared defy Ser Alliser only to a point, and he feared he was well beyond it now.
琼恩抽出长剑，他只敢反抗艾里沙爵士到某种程度，而他暗自担心这回做得太过火了。
Thorne smiled. “The Bastard wishes to defend his lady love, so we shall make an exercise of it. Rat, Pimple, help our Stone Head here.” Rast and Albett moved to join Halder. “Three of you ought to be sufficient to make Lady Piggy squeal. All you need do is get past the Bastard.”
索恩微笑道：“野种打算为他心爱的小姐而战，所以我们得好好打一场。小老鼠、雀斑男，你们跟大笨头一边。”雷斯特和阿贝特走到霍德旁边。“你们三个人应该够猪小姐受的了。但首先，你们要打发掉挡路的野种。”
“Stay behind me,” Jon said to the fat boy. Ser Alliser had often sent two foes against him, but never three. He knew he would likely go to sleep bruised and bloody tonight. He braced himself for the assault.
“躲在我背后。”琼恩对胖子说。艾里沙爵士常叫两人打他一个，但从来没有三对一。他自知今晚上床时大概会伤痕累累。于是他屏气凝神，准备大干一场。
Suddenly Pyp was beside him. “Three to two will make for better sport,” the small boy said cheerfully. He dropped his visor and slid out his sword. Before Jon could even think to protest, Grenn had stepped up to make a third.
派普突然出现在他身边。“我想三打二应该会更精彩。”小个子开心地说。他放下面罩，抽出佩剑。琼恩还来不及抗议，葛兰也走上前来加入他们。
The yard had grown deathly quiet. Jon could feel Ser Alliser’s eyes. “Why are you waiting?” he asked Rast and the others in a voice gone deceptively soft, but it was Jon who moved first. Halder barely got his sword up in time.
整个广场顿时一片死寂。琼恩感觉得出艾里沙爵士的眼神。“你们还等什么？”他用轻得吓人的声音问雷斯特和其他人，然而最先出手的却是琼恩，霍德差点就不及举剑格挡。
Jon drove him backward, attacking with every blow, keeping the older boy on the heels. Know your foe , Ser Rodrik had taught him once; Jon knew Halder, brutally strong but short of patience, with no taste for defense. Frustrate him, and he would leave himself open, as certain as sunset.
琼恩不断进攻，逼得这个年长的男孩节节后退。要了解你的敌人，罗德利克爵士曾经这么教他，而琼恩很了解霍德，他壮得惊人，但缺乏耐心，向来不惯防守。只要想办法激怒他，他自会门户洞开，破绽百出。
The clang of steel echoed through the yard as the others joined battle around him. Jon blocked a savage cut at his head, the shock of impact running up his arm as the swords crashed together. He slammed a sidestroke into Halder’s ribs, and was rewarded with a muffled grunt of pain. The counterstroke caught Jon on the shoulder. Chainmail crunched, and pain flared up his neck, but for an instant Halder was unbalanced. Jon cut his left leg from under him, and he fell with a curse and a crash.
这时其他人也加入战局，刀剑交击声刹时响彻广场。琼恩挡下一记照头挥来的猛击，力道之大震得他手臂酸麻。他一记侧劈打中霍德的肋骨，只听对方一声闷哼，随即反手砍中琼恩肩膀。锁甲铿锵一声，疼痛直逼脖颈，但霍德也暂时重心不稳，于是琼恩猛力扫他左腿，他咒骂着轰然倒地。
Grenn was standing his ground as Jon had taught him, giving Albett more than he cared for, but Pyp was hard-pressed. Rast had two years and forty pounds on him. Jon stepped up behind him and rang the raper’s helm like a bell. As Rast went reeling, Pyp slid in under his guard, knocked him down, and leveled a blade at his throat. By then Jon had moved on. Facing two swords, Albett backed away. “I yield,” he shouted.
葛兰依照琼恩教他的诀窍，稳稳地守住阵脚，让阿贝特大感头痛，但派普就没这么好过了。雷斯特大他两岁，又比他重上四十磅，所以他打得很吃力。琼恩闪到雷斯特身后，大力一挥，将这强奸犯的头盔当铃铛敲打，眼看雷斯特头晕眼花，派普乘机突破防线，将他击倒，然后举剑顶着他的喉咙。这时琼恩早已转换阵地，阿贝特一看自己陷入以一打二的劣势，急忙退后叫道：“我投降。”
Ser Alliser Thorne surveyed the scene with disgust. “The mummer’s farce has gone on long enough for today.” He walked away. The session was at an end.
艾里沙·索恩爵士一脸嫌恶地环视全场：“你们这些小鬼耍把戏也耍得太久了，今天就到此为止。”说完他走开去，当日的练习便告结束。
Dareon helped Halder to his feet. The quarryman’s son wrenched off his helm and threw it across the yard. “For an instant, I thought I finally had you, Snow.”
戴利恩扶霍德起身，采石匠的儿子摘下头盔狠狠地摔到广场对面。“雪诺，刚才那一刹那，我还以为逮到你破绽了呢。”
“For an instant, you did,” Jon replied. Under his mail and leather, his shoulder was throbbing. He sheathed his sword and tried to remove his helm, but when he raised his arm, the pain made him grit his teeth.
“嗯，但只有那一刹那。”琼恩回答。覆盖在护甲和皮革下的肩膀隐隐作痛，他收起剑，想取下头盔，但刚抬手就痛得龇牙咧嘴。
“Let me,” a voice said. Thick-fingered hands unfastened helm from gorget and lifted it off gently. “Did he hurt you?”
“让我来。”一个声音说。粗厚的手指解开他喉咙的皮带，轻轻地捧起头盔。“伤得严重吗？”
“I’ve been bruised before.” He touched his shoulder and winced. The yard was emptying around them.
“不是第一次了。”他摸摸肩膀，皱紧眉头，广场上除了他们几个一片空旷。
Blood matted the fat boy’s hair where Halder had split his helm asunder. “My name is Samwell Tarly, of Horn …” He stopped and licked his lips. “I mean, I was of Horn Hill, until I … left. I’ve come to take the black. My father is Lord Randyll, a bannerman to the Tyrells of Highgarden. I used to be his heir, only …” His voice trailed off.
胖男孩的发际有凝固的血块，正是刚才霍德砍裂头盔的地方。“我是山姆威尔·塔利，来自角……”他停下来舔舔嘴，“我的意思是……那是我……我‘曾经’是角陵塔利家族的人。我前来加入黑衫军，家父是蓝道伯爵，高庭提利尔家族的封臣。我本来是爵位继承人，不过……”他没有说下去。
“I’m Jon Snow, Ned Stark’s bastard, of Winterfell.”
“我是琼恩·雪诺，临冬城公爵奈德·史塔克的私生子。”
Samwell Tarly nodded. “I … if you want, you can call me Sam. My mother calls me Sam.”
山姆威尔·塔利点点头。“我……如果你愿意的话，可以叫我山姆，我妈都这样叫我。”
“You can call him Lord Snow,” Pyp said as he came up to join them. “You don’t want to know what his mother calls him.”
“你呢，则要尊称他雪诺大人，”派普边说边凑过来。“你不会想知道他妈怎么叫他的。”
“These two are Grenn and Pypar,” Jon said.
“这两位是葛兰和派普。”琼恩说。
“Grenn’s the ugly one,” Pyp said.
“长得丑的是葛兰。”派普道。
Grenn scowled. “You’re uglier than me. At least I don’t have ears like a bat.”
葛兰一脸不悦地说：“你比我丑咧，起码我没生一对蝙蝠耳。”
“My thanks to all of you,” the fat boy said gravely.
“我衷心地感谢你们。”胖男孩正色道。
“Why didn’t you get up and fight?” Grenn demanded.
“刚才你怎么不站起来反击啊？”葛兰问他。
“I wanted to, truly. I just … I couldn’t. I didn’t want him to hit me anymore.” He looked at the ground. “I … I fear I’m a coward. My lord father always said so.”
“我也想，真的，可我……我就是做不到。我也不想一直被揍。”他看看地面，“我……我猜我是窝囊废一个，家父常这么说。”
Grenn looked thunderstruck. Even Pyp had no words to say to that, and Pyp had words for everything. What sort of man would proclaim himself a coward?
葛兰的表情如遭雷击，就连派普也说不出话来，而他一向对任何事情都爱发表意见。怎么会有人自称窝囊废呢？
Samwell Tarly must have read their thoughts on their faces. His eyes met Jon’s and darted away, quick as frightened animals. “I … I’m sorry,” he said. “I don’t mean to … to be like I am.” He walked heavily toward the armory.
山姆威尔·塔利想必是从他们脸上读出了他们的想法，他的视线刚碰到琼恩的眼睛，随即像受惊的动物般转开。“我……对不起，”他说，“我……也不想这样的。”他沉重地走向武器库。
Jon called after him. “You were hurt,” he said. “Tomorrow you’ll do better.”
琼恩叫住他。“你受伤了，”他说，“明天你就会进步的。”
Sam looked mournfully back over one shoulder. “No I won’t,” he said, blinking back tears. “I never do better.”
山姆一脸哀怨地回过头。“才不会，”他强忍泪水说，“我永远都不会进步。”
When he was gone, Grenn frowned. “Nobody likes cravens,” he said uncomfortably. “I wish we hadn’t helped him. What if they think we’re craven too?”
等他走后，葛兰皱起眉头。“胆小鬼人人讨厌，”他很不舒服地说，“早知道咱们就不帮他了。要是别人把咱们也当胆小鬼那还得了？”
“You’re too stupid to be craven,” Pyp told him.
“你太笨啦，当不成胆小鬼的。”派普告诉他。
“I am not,” Grenn said.
“我才不笨。”葛兰说。
“Yes you are. If a bear attacked you in the woods, you’d be too stupid to run away.”
“你笨死了。要在树林里遇到大熊，你都不会跑哟。”
“I would not,” Grenn insisted. “I’d run away faster than you.” He stopped suddenly, scowling when he saw Pyp’s grin and realized what he’d just said. His thick neck flushed a dark red. Jon left them there arguing as he returned to the armory, hung up his sword, and stripped off his battered armor.
“我当然会跑，”葛兰坚持，“而且跑得比你快。”他看到派普嘻皮笑脸，赶紧住口，这才恍然大悟，气得脸红脖子粗。琼恩让他们吵个痛快，自己走回武器库，挂回佩剑，脱下一身伤痕累累的铠甲。
Life at Castle Black followed certain patterns; the mornings were for swordplay, the afternoons for work. The black brothers set new recruits to many different tasks, to learn where their skills lay. Jon cherished the rare afternoons when he was sent out with Ghost ranging at his side to bring back game for the Lord Commander’s table, but for every day spent hunting, he gave a dozen to Donal Noye in the armory, spinning the whetstone while the one-armed smith sharpened axes grown dull from use, or pumping the bellows as Noye hammered out a new sword. Other times he ran messages, stood at guard, mucked out stables, fletched arrows, assisted Maester Aemon with his birds or Bowen Marsh with his counts and inventories.
黑城堡的生活有种固定的规律：早上练剑，下午干活。黑衫弟兄交给新兵们各种不同的差事，以判断他们适合的职业。偶尔琼恩会奉命带着白灵出外打猎，为总司令的晚餐加菜，他非常珍惜这种机会。只可惜这种机会实在少之又少，他得用十几倍的时间待在唐纳·诺伊的武器库里，转磨刀石，帮这位独臂铁匠把钝斧磨利；或是在诺伊敲打铸剑时，在旁鼓动风炉。其他时候他还会传达口信，站岗放哨，刷洗马厩，制造弓箭，照料伊蒙师傅的鸟儿或协助波文·马尔锡清点账目。
That afternoon, the watch commander sent him to the winch cage with four barrels of fresh-crushed stone, to scatter gravel over the icy footpaths atop the Wall. It was lonely and boring work, even with Ghost along for company, but Jon found he did not mind. On a clear day you could see half the world from the top of the Wall, and the air was always cold and bracing. He could think here, and he found himself thinking of Samwell Tarly … and, oddly, of Tyrion Lannister. He wondered what Tyrion would have made of the fat boy. Most men would rather deny a hard truth than face it , the dwarf had told him, grinning. The world was full of cravens who pretended to be heroes; it took a queer sort of courage to admit to cowardice as Samwell Tarly had.
当天下午，他奉守卫长之命，带着四桶刚压碎的小石子，前往升降铁笼，负责把碎石铺在长城结冰的走道上。即使有白灵相伴，这依旧是件既孤单又无趣的差事，但琼恩不以为忤。倘若天气清朗，站在长城之上，半个世界尽收眼底，何况这里的空气向来清新冷冽。他可以在这里静静思考，而他发觉自己想起了山姆威尔·塔利……奇怪的是，还有提利昂·兰尼斯特。他不禁好奇提利昂会怎么对待这胖小子。侏儒曾嘻嘻笑着对他说：大部分的人宁可否认事实，也不愿面对真相。这个世界有太多逞英雄的胆小鬼，能像山姆威尔·塔利这样自承怯懦还真需要点古怪的勇气。
His sore shoulder made the work go slowly. It was late afternoon before Jon finished graveling the paths. He lingered on high to watch the sun go down, turning the western sky the color of blood. Finally, as dusk was settling over the north, Jon rolled the empty barrels back into the cage and signaled the winch men to lower him.
他的肩膀还在痛，也因此拖慢了工作进度，等铺完走道，天已经快黑。他逗留在长城上观看日落，看着夕阳把西边的天染成一片血红。直到夜幕低垂，琼恩方才拾起空桶，走回铁笼，拉铃叫下面的守卫放他下去。
The evening meal was almost done by the time he and Ghost reached the common hall. A group of the black brothers were dicing over mulled wine near the fire. His friends were at the bench nearest the west wall, laughing. Pyp was in the middle of a story. The mummer’s boy with the big ears was a born liar with a hundred different voices, and he did not tell his tales so much as live them, playing all the parts as needed, a king one moment and a swineherd the next. When he turned into an alehouse girl or a virgin princess, he used a high falsetto voice that reduced them all to tears of helpless laughter, and his eunuchs were always eerily accurate caricatures of Ser Alliser. Jon took as much pleasure from Pyp’s antics as anyone … yet that night he turned away and went instead to the end of the bench, where Samwell Tarly sat alone, as far from the others as he could get.
他和白灵回到大厅时，晚餐已差不多结束。一群黑衣弟兄聚在火炉边喝着烫过的酒，赌起骰子。他的朋友们坐在西墙下的长凳上，笑作一团。派普正绘声绘色地说着故事，这个跟过戏班的大耳朵男孩是个天生的骗子，擅长模仿各种声音，听他讲故事，如同身临其境，一会儿模仿国王，一会儿又变成猪倌。当他学起酒店女侍或待字闺中的公主时，那高亢的假音每每让大伙儿笑得泪流不止，而他装起太监则像极夸张化的艾里沙爵士。琼恩和大家一样喜欢听派普胡闹……但这天晚上他却转身走到长凳的尽头，山姆威尔·塔利坐在那儿，离其他人远远的。
He was finishing the last of the pork pie the cooks had served up for supper when Jon sat down across from him. The fat boy’s eyes widened at the sight of Ghost. “Is that a wolf?”
琼恩在他对面坐下时，他正吃着厨子们为晚餐准备的最后一个猪肉馅饼。胖男孩看到白灵，两眼张得老大。“那是狼？”
“A direwolf,” Jon said. “His name is Ghost. The direwolf is the sigil of my father’s House.”
“是冰原狼，”琼恩道，“他叫白灵。冰原狼是我父亲的家徽。”
“Ours is a striding huntsman,” Samwell Tarly said.
“我们家是健步猎人。”山姆威尔·塔利说。
“Do you like to hunt?”
“你喜欢打猎？”
The fat boy shuddered. “I hate it.” He looked as though he was going to cry again.
胖男孩听了浑身发抖，“最讨厌了，”他似乎又要哭起来。
“What’s wrong now?” Jon asked him. “Why are you always so frightened?”
“又怎么了？”琼恩问他，“你怎么老是怕东怕西？”
Sam stared at the last of his pork pie and gave a feeble shake of his head, too scared even to talk. A burst of laughter filled the hall. Jon heard Pyp squeaking in a high voice. He stood. “Let’s go outside.”
山姆盯着最后一个猪肉馅饼，虚弱地摇摇头，吓得连话都不敢说。大厅里突然响起一阵哄笑，琼恩听到派普用假音发出怪叫。他站起身。“我们出去吧。”
The round fat face looked up at him, suspicious. “Why? What will we do outside?”
肥大的圆脸抬起来，狐疑地看着他。“干嘛？出去做什么？”
“Talk,” Jon said. “Have you seen the Wall?”
“聊天。”琼恩道，“你看到长城了吗？”
“I’m fat, not blind,” Samwell Tarly said. “Of course I saw it, it’s seven hundred feet high.” Yet he stood up all the same, wrapped a fur-lined cloak over his shoulders, and followed Jon from the common hall, still wary, as if he suspected some cruel trick was waiting for him in the night. Ghost padded along beside them. “I never thought it would be like this,” Sam said as they walked, his words steaming in the cold air. Already he was huffing and puffing as he tried to keep up. “All the buildings are falling down, and it’s so … so …”
“我胖虽胖，眼睛可没瞎。”山姆威尔·塔利说，“我当然看见了，它有七百尺高哩。”但他还是站了起来，裹起一件绒毛滚边的披风，随琼恩走出大厅。他依旧提心吊胆，仿佛怀疑有什么卑劣的恶作剧在门外的暗夜等候他。白灵跟在他们身边。“我真没想到是这样，”山姆边走边说，呼息在冷气里凝成白雾。他光是跟上脚步，就已经累得气喘吁吁。“所有的房舍都破败不堪，而且这儿好……好……”
“Cold?” A hard frost was settling over the castle, and Jon could hear the soft crunch of grey weeds beneath his boots.
“好冷？”厚厚的冻霜正逐渐笼罩城堡，琼恩感觉得到灰色的野草在他脚下咯啦碎裂。
Sam nodded miserably. “I hate the cold,” he said. “Last night I woke up in the dark and the fire had gone out and I was certain I was going to freeze to death by morning.”
山姆悲苦地点头。“我最怕冷了，”他说，“昨晚我半夜醒来，屋里黑漆漆的，火也熄了，我本以为等到今早上，自己一定会活活冻死。”
“It must have been warmer where you come from.”
“你一定是从比较温暖的地方来的。”
“I never saw snow until last month. We were crossing the barrowlands, me and the men my father sent to see me north, and this white stuff began to fall, like a soft rain. At first I thought it was so beautiful, like feathers drifting from the sky, but it kept on and on, until I was frozen to the bone. The men had crusts of snow in their beards and more on their shoulders, and still it kept coming. I was afraid it would never end.”
“到上个月为止，我都没见过雪。当时我正跟家父派来送我北上的人穿越荒冢地，天上就开始落下这种白白的东西，像阵柔软的雨。起初我觉得好美，像是从天而降的羽毛，但它下个不停，冻得我连骨头都快结冰。雪一直下，下到人们胡子里都是冰块，肩膀上也积满了雪，还是不停，我真怕它就这样下个没完。”
Jon smiled.
琼恩只是微笑。
The Wall loomed before them, glimmering palely in the light of the half moon. In the sky above, the stars burned clear and sharp. “Are they going to make me go up there?” Sam asked. His face curdled like old milk as he looked at the great wooden stairs. “I’ll die if I have to climb that.”
绝境长城高高地耸立在他们面前，在残月苍白的光芒照映下闪闪发亮。繁星在头顶的夜幕中燃烧，澄澈而锐利。“他们会逼我上去吗？”山姆问，他一眼扫到城上蜿蜒的木制长梯，脸顿时像结块的酸牛奶一样僵硬。“要我爬上去我不死才怪。”
“There’s a winch,” Jon said, pointing. “They can draw you up in a cage.”
“那边有个绞盘，”琼恩指给他看，“你可以坐在铁笼里吊上去。”
Samwell Tarly sniffled. “I don’t like high places.”
山姆威尔·塔利哼了一声：“我讨厌高的地方。”
It was too much. Jon frowned, incredulous. “Are you afraid of everything?” he asked. “I don’t understand. If you are truly so craven, why are you here? Why would a coward want to join the Night’s Watch?”
这太离谱了。琼恩难以置信地皱起眉头。“你到底有什么不怕？”他问，“我真搞不懂，假如你真这么窝囊，那你干嘛来这儿？胆小鬼加入守夜人部队做什么？”
Samwell Tarly looked at him for a long moment, and his round face seemed to cave in on itself. He sat down on the frost-covered ground and began to cry, huge choking sobs that made his whole body shake. Jon Snow could only stand and watch. Like the snowfall on the barrowlands, it seemed the tears would never end.
山姆威尔·塔利久久地注视着他，那张大圆脸仿佛就要塌陷进去。他在结霜的地面坐下，竟就这么哭了起来，抽抽噎噎，整个身体都在颤抖。琼恩·雪诺没了主意，只能站在一旁观看。他的泪水如同荒冢地的雪，似乎永远不会停。
It was Ghost who knew what to do. Silent as shadow, the pale direwolf moved closer and began to lick the warm tears off Samwell Tarly’s face. The fat boy cried out, startled … and somehow, in a heartbeat, his sobs turned to laughter.
到头来还是白灵聪明。苍白的冰原狼像阴影一般无声地靠过去，舔舐山姆威尔·塔利脸上温热的泪水。胖男孩惊叫了一声……但不知什么缘故，转眼间他的啜泣就变成了欢笑。
Jon Snow laughed with him. Afterward they sat on the frozen ground, huddled in their cloaks with Ghost between them. Jon told the story of how he and Robb had found the pups newborn in the late summer snows. It seemed a thousand years ago now. Before long he found himself talking of Winterfell.
琼恩·雪诺也笑了。随后他们一起坐在结冰的地面上，蜷缩在斗篷里，白灵窝在两人之间。琼恩说起他和罗柏在夏末雪地里找到刚出生的小狼群的故事。这好像是一千年前的故事了。但很快，他发觉自己谈到了临冬城。
“Sometimes I dream about it,” he said. “I’m walking down this long empty hall. My voice echoes all around, but no one answers, so I walk faster, opening doors, shouting names. I don’t even know who I’m looking for. Most nights it’s my father, but sometimes it’s Robb instead, or my little sister Arya, or my uncle.” The thought of Benjen Stark saddened him; his uncle was still missing. The Old Bear had sent out rangers in search of him. Ser Jaremy Rykker had led two sweeps, and Quorin Halfhand had gone forth from the Shadow Tower, but they’d found nothing aside from a few blazes in the trees that his uncle had left to mark his way. In the stony highlands to the northwest, the marks stopped abruptly and all trace of Ben Stark vanished.
“我有时候做梦都还会回去。”他说，“我梦到自己走在空荡荡的大厅里，四壁反射着我的声音，却无人应答，所以我加快脚步，打开一扇扇门，喊着其他人的名字。我不知道自己究竟要找谁，多半是找我父亲，有时候却是罗柏，有时又是我小妹艾莉亚，或是我叔叔。”想起至今依然下落不明的班扬·史塔克，他不禁难过起来。熊老派了游骑兵北出长城去找他。杰瑞米·莱克爵士领过两次队，“断掌”科林则从影子塔出发，但除了叔叔在森林里偶尔留下来当路标的火把外，可说一无所获。一旦进入陡峭的西北高地，各种记号便都突然不见，班扬·史塔克的痕迹消失得无影无踪。
“Do you ever find anyone in your dream?” Sam asked.
“在梦中你找到人了吗？”山姆问。
Jon shook his head. “No one. The castle is always empty.” He had never told anyone of the dream, and he did not understand why he was telling Sam now, yet somehow it felt good to talk of it. “Even the ravens are gone from the rookery, and the stables are full of bones. That always scares me. I start to run then, throwing open doors, climbing the tower three steps at a time, screaming for someone, for anyone. And then I find myself in front of the door to the crypts. It’s black inside, and I can see the steps spiraling down. Somehow I know I have to go down there, but I don’t want to. I’m afraid of what might be waiting for me. The old Kings of Winter are down there, sitting on their thrones with stone wolves at their feet and iron swords across their laps, but it’s not them I’m afraid of. I scream that I’m not a Stark, that this isn’t my place, but it’s no good, I have to go anyway, so I start down, feeling the walls as I descend, with no torch to light the way. It gets darker and darker, until I want to scream.” He stopped, frowning, embarrassed. “That’s when I always wake.” His skin cold and clammy, shivering in the darkness of his cell. Ghost would leap up beside him, his warmth as comforting as daybreak. He would go back to sleep with his face pressed into the direwolf’s shaggy white fur. “Do you dream of Horn Hill?” Jon asked.
琼恩摇摇头。“一次也没有。城堡里总是空无一人。”他从未对人说起过这个梦，更不明白自己此刻为何独对山姆敞开胸怀，但说出来的感觉真好。“连鸟巢里的乌鸦也不见了，马厩里只剩下一堆枯骨，每次都把我吓得半死。我开始乱跑，到处开门，三步并作两步地爬着高塔楼梯，尖叫着别人的名字，任何人都好。最后，我发现自己站在通往地下墓窖的门前，里面一团漆黑，我只能看见蜿蜒向下的螺旋梯。不知怎的，我很清楚自己必须下去，但我却不想下去。我害怕等在里面的东西。古时候历代的冬境之王都在那儿，坐在他们的王位上，石雕狼躺在脚边，大腿横放着铁剑，可我怕的却不是他们。我大声尖叫，我告诉他们我不是史塔克家的人，此地与我无关，然而没有用，不管怎样我都必须下去。于是我扶着墙壁前进，没有火把照明，我只好慢慢往下走。路越来越暗，越来越暗，暗到我直想尖叫。”他停下来，皱起眉头，觉得很不好意思。“每次梦到这里，我就醒了。”他醒来时总是浑身冷汗，独自在黑暗的卧室里发抖。这时白灵会跳到他身边，用如朝阳般温暖的身躯依偎他，然后他会把脸枕在冰原狼长长的白色毛皮上，再度沉沉睡去。“你会梦见角陵吗？”
“No.” Sam’s mouth grew tight and hard. “I hated it there.” He scratched Ghost behind the ear, brooding, and Jon let the silence breathe. After a long while Samwell Tarly began to talk, and Jon Snow listened quietly, and learned how it was that a self-confessed coward found himself on the Wall.
“不会。”山姆抿紧嘴唇。“我讨厌那里。”他搔搔白灵耳背，陷入沉思，琼恩也没追问。又过了一阵子，山姆威尔·塔利终于开始说话，琼恩·雪诺则静静聆听，听这个自承懦弱的胆小鬼亲口述说来到绝境长城的的缘由。
The Tarlys were a family old in honor, bannermen to Mace Tyrell, Lord of Highgarden and Warden of the South. The eldest son of Lord Randyll Tarly, Samwell was born heir to rich lands, a strong keep, and a storied two-handed greatsword named Heartsbane, forged of Valyrian steel and passed down from father to son near five hundred years.
塔利家族历史悠久，盛名远播，是高庭公爵兼南境守护梅斯·提利尔的封臣。山姆威尔乃是蓝道·塔利伯爵的嫡长子，生来就继承了富饶的领地、坚固的堡垒和一把传奇的双手巨剑。剑名“碎心”，是用瓦雷利亚钢打造而成，父子历代相传，已有近五百年之久。
Whatever pride his lord father might have felt at Samwell’s birth vanished as the boy grew up plump, soft, and awkward. Sam loved to listen to music and make his own songs, to wear soft velvets, to play in the castle kitchen beside the cooks, drinking in the rich smells as he snitched lemon cakes and blueberry tarts. His passions were books and kittens and dancing, clumsy as he was. But he grew ill at the sight of blood, and wept to see even a chicken slaughtered. A dozen masters-at-arms came and went at Horn Hill, trying to turn Samwell into the knight his father wanted. The boy was cursed and caned, slapped and starved. One man had him sleep in his chainmail to make him more martial. Another dressed him in his mother’s clothing and paraded him through the bailey to shame him into valor. He only grew fatter and more frightened, until Lord Randyll’s disappointment turned to anger and then to loathing. “One time,” Sam confided, his voice dropping from a whisper, “two men came to the castle, warlocks from Qarth with white skin and blue lips. They slaughtered a bull aurochs and made me bathe in the hot blood, but it didn’t make me brave as they’d promised. I got sick and retched. Father had them scourged.”
然而不论山姆威尔诞生时，父亲对儿子有着何种的骄傲，都已经随着他的日渐长大、变得肥胖、柔弱又脾气古怪，而全部烟消云散。山姆喜欢听音乐，喜欢编曲子，喜欢穿柔软的天鹅绒，喜欢跟在城堡厨房的师傅身边、陶醉于他调制的柠檬蛋糕和蓝莓甜饼的浓郁香气里。他的兴趣在于读书以及和小猫玩耍，手脚笨拙的他，却又反常地热爱舞蹈。只是他见了血就反胃，连看杀鸡都会哭。角陵的教头来了又去，试图将山姆威尔变成他父亲所期望的骁勇骑士。这孩子受过骂也挨过棍，尝过耳光也熬过饿。有个人叫他穿着锁子甲睡觉，好让他习惯军中生活。另一个人则叫他穿上母亲的衣服，绕城示众，用羞辱来激发他的男子气概。结果他却越来越胖，胆子越变越小，最后蓝道伯爵的失望转成愤怒，终至厌恶。“有一次，”山姆透露，他的声音像是悄悄话。“从魁尔斯来了两个白皮肤蓝嘴唇的男巫，他们杀了一头野公牛，然后把我浸在温热的鲜血里，可我并没有像他们所说的那样变勇敢，我只觉得恶心，呕吐。结果父亲教他们两个都吃了顿鞭子。”
Finally, after three girls in as many years, Lady Tarly gave her lord husband a second son. From that day, Lord Randyll ignored Sam, devoting all his time to the younger boy, a fierce, robust child more to his liking. Samwell had known several years of sweet peace with his music and his books.
在接连三年生出三个女儿后，塔利夫人终于又为伯爵产下第二个儿子。从那天起，蓝道伯爵便不再理会山姆，而把全副精神都投注在这个年纪较小、强壮又有活力，怎么看都更讨他欢喜的儿子身上。于是山姆威尔度过了几年甜美的安逸岁月，沉浸在音乐和书本中。
Until the dawn of his fifteenth name day, when he had been awakened to find his horse saddled and ready. Three men-at-arms had escorted him into a wood near Horn Hill, where his father was skinning a deer. “You are almost a man grown now, and my heir,” Lord Randyll Tarly had told his eldest son, his long knife laying bare the carcass as he spoke. “You have given me no cause to disown you, but neither will I allow you to inherit the land and title that should be Dickon’s. Heartsbane must go to a man strong enough to wield her, and you are not worthy to touch her hilt. So I have decided that you shall this day announce that you wish to take the black. You will forsake all claim to your brother’s inheritance and start north before evenfall.
直到他十五岁命名日那天清晨，他被叫醒后，发现自己的马已经鞍辔妥当，正等着他。三个侍卫护送他来到角陵附近一座森林里，父亲在那儿剥鹿皮。“你就快成年了，又是我的继承人，”蓝道·塔利伯爵一边用猎刀割开皮肉，露出里面的骨架，一边对他的长子说，“你没给我什么借口，我无法将你除名，但我也不会把该由狄肯继承的领地和封号交给你。只有强壮的人才配持有”碎心“，而你连碰它的剑柄都不配。所以我作了决定，你今天就得宣布自己渴望披上黑衣，放弃一切继承权，并在天黑前动身北上。”
“If you do not, then on the morrow we shall have a hunt, and somewhere in these woods your horse will stumble, and you will be thrown from the saddle to die … or so I will tell your mother. She has a woman’s heart and finds it in her to cherish even you, and I have no wish to cause her pain. Please do not imagine that it will truly be that easy, should you think to defy me. Nothing would please me more than to hunt you down like the pig you are.” His arms were red to the elbow as he laid the skinning knife aside. “So. There is your choice. The Night’s Watch”—he reached inside the deer, ripped out its heart, and held it in his fist, red and dripping—“or this.”
“如果你不照办，那明天我们会外出打猎，而你的马将在林中某处跌倒，你也会飞出马鞍摔死……至少我会这么告诉你母亲。她心肠太软，连对你这种人都疼爱有加，我不想让她难过。你不用幻想会死得多干脆，或是有办法抵抗，因为我会很乐意穷追不舍，亲手宰掉你这头猪。”他抛开猎刀，手臂到肘全都染得腥红。“所以啰，你有两个选择，不是守夜人，”——他把手伸进鹿尸，掏出心脏，血淋淋地握在手中——“就是这个。”
Sam told the tale in a calm, dead voice, as if it were something that had happened to someone else, not to him. And strangely, Jon thought, he did not weep, not even once. When he was done, they sat together and listened to the wind for a time. There was no other sound in all the world.
山姆用种平静而死板的声音说着故事，仿佛这事发生在别人身上，而不是他自己。奇怪的是，琼恩心想，他竟然停下来不哭了。他说完后，两人坐在一起听夜风。全世界没有旁的声音。
Finally Jon said, “We should go back to the common hall.”
最后琼恩道：“我们该回大厅去了。”
“Why?” Sam asked.
“怎么？”
Jon shrugged. “There’s hot cider to drink, or mulled wine if you prefer. Some nights Dareon sings for us, if the mood is on him. He was a singer, before … well, not truly, but almost, an apprentice singer.”
琼恩耸耸肩。“那儿有热苹果酒可喝，不然你也可以喝烫过的葡萄酒。戴利恩心情好的话，会唱歌给我们听。来这儿之前，他原本……呃，是个歌手，嗯，可能不很专业啦，但挺不赖，算是未出师的歌手罢。”
“How did he come here?” Sam asked.
“他怎么会来这儿？”山姆问。
“Lord Rowan of Goldengrove found him in bed with his daughter. The girl was two years older, and Dareon swears she helped him through her window, but under her father’s eye she named it rape, so here he is. When Maester Aemon heard him sing, he said his voice was honey poured over thunder.” Jon smiled. “Toad sometimes sings too, if you call it singing. Drinking songs he learned in his father’s winesink. Pyp says his voice is piss poured over a fart.” They laughed at that together.
“金树城的罗宛伯爵发现女儿被他睡了。那个女的大他两岁，戴利恩发誓是她帮他爬进卧室窗户的，可在父亲严厉的目光下，她指称自己是被强暴，于是他就来啦。伊蒙师傅听过他唱歌后，说他的声音像加了蜜的雷。”琼恩微笑，“陶德有时也唱歌，如果你把那也算做是歌的话。他都唱些打他爹那儿学来的饮酒歌，派普说他的声音是加了尿的屁。”两人齐声哈哈大笑。
“I should like to hear them both,” Sam admitted, “but they would not want me there.” His face was troubled. “He’s going to make me fight again on the morrow, isn’t he?”
“他们两人的歌声我都想听听，”山姆承认。“但他们不会欢迎我的。”他满脸愁容道，“他明天还会逼我打架，对吧？”
“He is,” Jon was forced to say.
“没错。”琼恩很不情愿地说。
Sam got awkwardly to his feet. “I had better try to sleep,” He huddled down in his cloak and plodded off.
山姆蹒跚地站起身。“我想办法睡一会儿好了。”他裹紧斗篷离开。
The others were still in the common room when Jon returned, alone but for Ghost. “Where have you been?” Pyp asked.
琼恩带着白灵回到大厅时，其他人都还在。“你跑哪儿去啦？”派普问。
“Talking with Sam,” he said.
“跟山姆聊天。”他说。
“He truly is craven,” said Grenn. “At supper, there were still places on the bench when he got his pie, but he was too scared to come sit with us.”
“他实在窝囊透顶，”葛兰道，“晚上吃饭，长凳上明明还有空位，可他拿了馅饼偏偏就不敢过来跟我们一起坐。”
“The Lord of Ham thinks he’s too good to eat with the likes of us,” suggested Jeren.
“火腿大人太尊贵啦，不跟我们这种人同桌用饭的。”杰伦猜测。
“I saw him eat a pork pie,” Toad said, smirking. “Do you think it was a brother?” He began to make oinking noises.
“你们看看他吃猪肉饼的样子，”陶德狞笑道，“简直就是在跟兄弟叙旧。”说完他学起了猪叫。
“Stop it!” Jon snapped angrily.
“闭嘴！”琼恩愤怒地斥道。
The other boys fell silent, taken aback by his sudden fury. “Listen to me,” Jon said into the quiet, and he told them how it was going to be. Pyp backed him, as he’d known he would, but when Halder spoke up, it was a pleasant surprise. Grenn was anxious at the first, but Jon knew the words to move him. One by one the rest fell in line. Jon persuaded some, cajoled some, shamed the others, made threats where threats were required. At the end they had all agreed … all but Rast.
其他男孩被他突如其来的怒气吓住，纷纷沉默下来。“听我说。”琼恩平静地告诉他们该怎么做。如他所料，派普站在他这边，但令人惊喜的是霍德也表示支持。葛兰起初还有些犹豫，但琼恩知道怎样才能说动他。其他人也纷纷同意。琼恩或好言劝说，或以利相诱，有时出言羞辱，必要的话也用武力要挟。最后所有人都愿意照他的话去做……只有雷斯特不肯。
“You girls do as you please,” Rast said, “but if Thorne sends me against Lady Piggy, I’m going to slice me off a rasher of bacon.” He laughed in Jon’s face and left them there.
“你们要孬种就孬种罢，”雷斯特说，“但如果索恩叫我跟猪小姐打，我可是会好好切他一大块火腿下来。”他当着琼恩的面冷笑两声，转身便走。
Hours later, as the castle slept, three of them paid a call on his cell. Grenn held his arms while Pyp sat on his legs. Jon could hear Rast’s rapid breathing as Ghost leapt onto his chest. The direwolf’s eyes burned red as embers as his teeth nipped lightly at the soft skin of the boy’s throat, just enough to draw blood. “Remember, we know where you sleep,” Jon said softly.
几小时后，当全城的人都在沉睡时，他们三个到他寝室去了一趟。当葛兰抓住他的手，派普坐上他的腿，白灵扑到他胸膛的时候，琼恩可以听见雷斯特急促的喘息。冰原狼的两眼如一对彤红的火烬，他用牙齿轻轻划破男孩喉咙柔软的皮肤，微微见血。“别忘了，我们知道你睡在哪儿。”琼恩轻声说。
The next morning Jon heard Rast tell Albett and Toad how his razor had slipped while he shaved.
隔天早上，琼恩听见雷斯特对阿贝特和陶德解释，说他刮胡子的时候如何不小心被剃刀刮伤。
From that day forth, neither Rast nor any of the others would hurt Samwell Tarly. When Ser Alliser matched them against him, they would stand their ground and swat aside his slow, clumsy strokes. If the master-at-arms screamed for an attack, they would dance in and tap Sam lightly on breastplate or helm or leg. Ser Alliser raged and threatened and called them all cravens and women and worse, yet Sam remained unhurt. A few nights later, at Jon’s urging, he joined them for the evening meal, taking a place on the bench beside Halder. It was another fortnight before he found the nerve to join their talk, but in time he was laughing at Pyp’s faces and teasing Grenn with the best of them.
从那天起，不论是雷斯特或其他人，谁都不会伤害山姆威尔·塔利。若艾里沙爵士要他们和他单打，他们就站在原地，拨开他缓慢笨拙的攻击。假如教头扯着喉咙叫他们进攻，他们便跳到山姆身边，然后轻轻地在他胸甲、头盔或脚上点一记。艾里沙爵士气得半死，出言胁迫，骂他们是懦夫、娘娘腔，什么难听的话都出了笼，但依旧没人动山姆半根汗毛。几天后的一个晚上，他在琼恩的敦促下，坐在霍德旁边跟大家一起吃晚餐。之后又过了两个星期，他才鼓起勇气加入谈话，很快就跟其他人一样，被派普的鬼脸逗得哈哈大笑，然后开起葛兰的玩笑来。
Fat and awkward and frightened he might be, but Samwell Tarly was no fool. One night he visited Jon in his cell. “I don’t know what you did,” he said, “but I know you did it.” He looked away shyly. “I’ve never had a friend before.”
山姆威尔·塔利虽然臃肿笨拙，胆子又小，但他可不笨。有天夜里，他来到琼恩的寝室，“我不知道你做了什么，”他说：“但我知道是你做的。”他害羞地转开视线。“我本来一个朋友也没有。”
“We’re not friends,” Jon said. He put a hand on Sam’s broad shoulder. “We’re brothers.”
“我们不是朋友，”琼恩拍拍山姆宽阔的肩膀，“我们是兄弟。”
And so they were, he thought to himself after Sam had taken his leave. Robb and Bran and Rickon were his father’s sons, and he loved them still, yet Jon knew that he had never truly been one of them. Catelyn Stark had seen to that. The grey walls of Winterfell might still haunt his dreams, but Castle Black was his life now, and his brothers were Sam and Grenn and Halder and Pyp and the other cast-outs who wore the black of the Night’s Watch.
他们的确是兄弟啊，山姆离开后，他暗自思量。罗柏、布兰和瑞肯都是父亲的孩子，他也依然爱着他们，但由于凯特琳·史塔克的关系，琼恩知道自己终究不是他们的一分子。临冬城的灰墙或许仍令他魂牵梦萦，然而现在黑城堡才是他的生命皈依，他的手足兄弟则是山姆、葛兰、霍德、派普和其他无法见容于社会。穿着黑衣的守夜人。
“My uncle spoke truly,” he whispered to Ghost. He wondered if he would ever see Benjen Stark again, to tell him.
“叔叔说得没错呢。”他悄声对白灵说，却不知此生能否与班扬·史塔克重逢，好当面感谢他。
*EDDARD
第二十八章 艾德
“I t’s the Hand’s tourney that’s the cause of all the trouble, my lords,” the Commander of the City Watch complained to the king’s council.
“诸位大人，这些麻烦都是首相的比武大会带来的。”都城守备队的司令官向御前会议抱怨。
“The king’s tourney,” Ned corrected, wincing. “I assure you, the Hand wants no part of it.”
“国王的比武大会，”奈德皱着眉头纠正他，“我跟你保证，首相对这事一点兴趣都没有。”
“Call it what you will, my lord. Knights have been arriving from all over the realm, and for every knight we get two freeriders, three craftsmen, six men-at-arms, a dozen merchants, two dozen whores, and more thieves than I dare guess. This cursed heat had half the city in a fever to start, and now with all these visitors … last night we had a drowning, a tavern riot, three knife fights, a rape, two fires, robberies beyond count, and a drunken horse race down the Street of the Sisters. The night before a woman’s head was found in the Great Sept, floating in the rainbow pool. No one seems to know how it got there or who it belongs to.”
“您怎么说都行，大人，可事实是全国各地的骑士陆陆续续都来了哪。而每来一个骑士呢，跟着就来两个自由骑手、三个工匠、六个大兵、一打生意人、两打妓女，至于小偷，多到我猜都不敢猜。这该死的热天已经害城里半数人热得晕头转向，现在又来这么多家伙……昨儿晚上就有人溺死，外加一起酒馆暴乱，三起持刀械斗，一起强奸案，两场火灾，抢劫数不清啦，还有匹喝醉的马冲到修女街去了。前天呢，则有个女人的头被人发现漂在大圣堂的彩虹池里，没人知道那颗头是打哪儿来的，也没人知道那是谁的头。”
“How dreadful,” Varys said with a shudder.
“真是吓人哟。”瓦里斯打着哆嗦。
Lord Renly Baratheon was less sympathetic. “If you cannot keep the king’s peace, Janos, perhaps the City Watch should be commanded by someone who can.”
蓝礼·拜拉席恩公爵可没他这么好心。“我说啊，杰诺斯，你要是连城里的秩序都无法维持，恐怕都城守卫队得换个有办法的人来当司令啰。”
Stout, jowly Janos Slynt puffed himself up like an angry frog, his bald pate reddening. “Aegon the Dragon himself could not keep the peace, Lord Renly. I need more men.”
史林特生得高头大马，一副双下巴，他听了这话立刻变得跟青蛙一样气鼓鼓的，光头顿时红了起来。“蓝礼大人，就算龙王伊耿再世也管不住。我需要人手。”
“How many?” Ned asked, leaning forward. As ever, Robert had not troubled himself to attend the council session, so it fell to his Hand to speak for him.
“你要多少人？”奈德倾身向前问。依惯例，劳勃又没参加会议，所以他这个“国王之手”只好代为发言。
“As many as can be gotten, Lord Hand.”
“首相大人，当然是越多越好。”
“Hire fifty new men,” Ned told him. “Lord Baelish will see that you get the coin.”
“那就雇五十个新兵，”奈德告诉他，“钱的事交给贝里席大人打点。”
“I will?” Littlefinger said.
“我打点？”小指头说。
“You will. You found forty thousand golden dragons for a champion’s purse, surely you can scrape together a few coppers to keep the king’s peace.” Ned turned back to Janos Slynt. “I will also give you twenty good swords from my own household guard, to serve with the Watch until the crowds have left.”
“没错。既然你连比武冠军的四万金龙赏金都筹得出，多弄几个铜板维持城里秩序想必不成问题。”奈德转头对杰诺斯·史林特道，“我再从我的贴身护卫中拨二十个人给你，直到城里这批人离开为止。”
“All thanks, Lord Hand,” Slynt said, bowing. “I promise you, they shall be put to good use.”
“非常感谢，首相大人。”史林特鞠躬，“我向您保证，一定让他们派上用场。”
When the Commander had taken his leave, Eddard Stark turned to the rest of the council. “The sooner this folly is done with, the better I shall like it.” As if the expense and trouble were not irksome enough, all and sundry insisted on salting Ned’s wound by calling it “the Hand’s tourney,” as if he were the cause of it. And Robert honestly seemed to think he should feel honored!
司令官离开后，奈德转向在场重臣：“这场闹剧早一天结束，我就早一天安心。”仿佛筹措经费和接踵而至的麻烦还不够他受，所有的闲杂人等都把这叫做“首相的比武大会”，这无疑是在伤口上洒盐，好像他才是罪魁祸首。而劳勃竟当真以为他应该为此感到光荣！
“The realm prospers from such events, my lord,” Grand Maester Pycelle said. “They bring the great the chance of glory, and the lowly a respite from their woes.”
“王国就是因为这种事才兴盛的啊，大人。”派席尔国师说，“对上等阶级而言，这是求取荣耀的大好时机。至于穷苦老百姓嘛，也能因此暂时忘忧解愁。”
“And put coins in many a pocket,” Littlefinger added. “Every inn in the city is full, and the whores are walking bowlegged and jingling with each step.”
“很多人还能藉此大捞一笔，”小指头补充，“城里的旅店通通客满，妓女接客接到脚都合不拢，走起路来口袋里的铜板响叮当。”
Lord Renly laughed. “We’re fortunate my brother Stannis is not with us. Remember the time he proposed to outlaw brothels? The king asked him if perhaps he’d like to outlaw eating, shitting, and breathing while he was at it. If truth be told, I ofttimes wonder how Stannis ever got that ugly daughter of his. He goes to his marriage bed like a man marching to a battlefield, with a grim look in his eyes and a determination to do his duty.”
蓝礼公爵哈哈大笑：“还好我二哥史坦尼斯不在。记不记得那次他提议查禁妓院？结果国王问他说要不要顺便连吃饭、拉屎、呼吸也统统禁了算了。老实讲，有时候我真怀疑史坦尼斯那个丑女儿是怎么来的。老哥他上床简直跟上战场一样，眼神庄严肃穆，打定主意要履行他的责任。”
Ned had not joined the laughter. “I wonder about your brother Stannis as well. I wonder when he intends to end his visit to Dragonstone and resume his seat on this council.”
奈德没有跟着笑。“我也在想你哥哥史坦尼斯的事，不知他何时才会结束龙石岛的探访，重新回到岗位。”
“No doubt as soon as we’ve scourged all those whores into the sea,” Littlefinger replied, provoking more laughter.
“只要我们把妓女统统赶进海里，他就会马上回来了罢。”小指头此话一出，其他人笑得更厉害了。
“I have heard quite enough about whores for one day,” Ned said, rising. “Until the morrow.”
“关于妓女的事，我今天也听够了。”奈德起身说，“就到此为止。”
Harwin had the door when Ned returned to the Tower of the Hand. “Summon Jory to my chambers and tell your father to saddle my horse,” Ned told him, too brusquely.
奈德回到首相塔时，守门的是哈尔温。“叫乔里到我房间来，然后叫你爹帮我备好马鞍。”奈德告诉他，口气稍冲了点。
“As you say, my lord.”
“是的，老爷。”
The Red Keep and the “Hand’s tourney” were chafing him raw, Ned reflected as he climbed. He yearned for the comfort of Catelyn’s arms, for the sounds of Robb and Jon crossing swords in the practice yard, for the cool days and cold nights of the north.
红堡里的御前会议和这所谓“首相的比武大会”让他满心不耐，奈德边爬楼梯边想。此刻他好想念凯特琳的怀抱，想念罗柏和琼恩在场子里练剑的声音，想念北方的凉爽白昼和清寒冷夜。
In his chambers he stripped off his council silks and sat for a moment with the book while he waited for Jory to arrive. The Lineages and Histories of the Great Houses of the Seven Kingdoms, With Descriptions of Many High Lords and Noble Ladies and Their Children , by Grand Maester Malleon. Pycelle had spoken truly; it made for ponderous reading. Yet Jon Arryn had asked for it, and Ned felt certain he had reasons. There was something here, some truth buried in these brittle yellow pages, if only he could see it. But what? The tome was over a century old. Scarcely a man now alive had yet been born when Malleon had compiled his dusty lists of weddings, births, and deaths.
进房后他褪去重臣穿的正式丝衣，坐着看了会儿书，等待乔里。这本书全名是《七国主要贵族之世家谱系与历史（内附关于许多爵爷夫人和他们子女的描述）》，由梅利恩国师所撰。派席尔说得没错，这东西还真是枯燥乏味。但琼恩·艾林既然找来读了，奈德相信必有其原因。在这些泛黄的脆弱书页间，肯定埋藏着重要的线索，问题只在于他是否能钻研出其中深意。那究竟是什么呢？这本书册的历史已经超过百年。当梅利恩收集这份蒙尘的婚丧喜庆清单时，目前活在世上的人几乎都还没出生呢。
He opened to the section on House Lannister once more, and turned the pages slowly, hoping against hope that something would leap out at him. The Lannisters were an old family, tracing their descent back to Lann the Clever, a trickster from the Age of Heroes who was no doubt as legendary as Bran the Builder, though far more beloved of singers and taletellers. In the songs, Lann was the fellow who winkled the Casterlys out of Casterly Rock with no weapon but his wits, and stole gold from the sun to brighten his curly hair. Ned wished he were here now, to winkle the truth out of this damnable book.
他再度翻到兰尼斯特家族的部分，刻意慢慢翻页，虽然明知不可能，却仍希望藉此灵光乍现。兰尼斯特家族历史悠久，向上可以追溯到英雄纪元时的骗术高手“机灵的”兰尼。他和“筑城者”布兰登一样同富传奇色彩，却更受歌手和说书人的爱戴。歌谣中的兰尼不靠刀剑，光凭他的机智就把凯斯德利家族赶出凯岩城，又从太阳那里偷来黄金为他的卷发增光。奈德真希望他此刻就在自己身边，帮他把书中那该死的秘密赶出来。
A sharp rap on the door heralded Jory Cassel. Ned closed Malleon’s tome and bid him enter. “I’ve promised the City Watch twenty of my guard until the tourney is done,” he told him. “I rely on you to make the choice. Give Alyn the command, and make certain the men understand that they are needed to stop fights, not start them.” Rising, Ned opened a cedar chest and removed a light linen undertunic. “Did you find the stableboy?”
一阵急促的敲门声宣告了乔里·凯索的到来。奈德阖上梅利恩的巨著，传他进来。“我答应从我的卫队里抽二十个人给都城守卫队，直到比武大会结束。”他告诉他，“挑人的事就交给你。让埃林领队，但务必让他们明白，首要任务是平息纷争，而非制造冲突。”奈德起身，打开雪松木箱，拿出一件轻制亚麻布上衣。“找到那个马僮了吗？”
“The watchman, my lord,” Jory said. “He vows he’ll never touch another horse.”
“老爷，您说的这个都城守卫，”乔里道，“他发誓这辈子再也不碰别的马了。”
“What did he have to say?”
“为什么？”
“He claims he knew Lord Arryn well. Fast friends, they were.” Jory snorted. “The Hand always gave the lads a copper on their name days, he says. Had a way with horses. Never rode his mounts too hard, and brought them carrots and apples, so they were always pleased to see him.”
“他说自己很了解艾林大人，说什么两人一拍即合。”乔里哼了一声，“他说每逢小伙子们命名日，首相大人总不忘赏几个小钱。还说首相大人熟悉马性，从不让坐骑过分劳累，还每每带胡萝卜和苹果给马儿吃，所以它们都很喜欢他。”
“Carrots and apples,” Ned repeated. It sounded as if this boy would be even less use than the others. And he was the last of the four Littlefinger had turned up. Jory had spoken to each of them in turn. Ser Hugh had been brusque and uninformative, and arrogant as only a new-made knight can be. If the Hand wished to talk to him, he should be pleased to receive him, but he would not be questioned by a mere captain of guards … even if said captain was ten years older and a hundred times the swordsman. The serving girl had at least been pleasant. She said Lord Jon had been reading more than was good for him, that he was troubled and melancholy over his young son’s frailty, and gruff with his lady wife. The potboy, now cordwainer, had never exchanged so much as a word with Lord Jon, but he was full of oddments of kitchen gossip: the lord had been quarreling with the king, the lord only picked at his food, the lord was sending his boy to be fostered on Dragonstone, the lord had taken a great interest in the breeding of hunting hounds, the lord had visited a master armorer to commission a new suit of plate, wrought all in pale silver with a blue jasper falcon and a mother-of-pearl moon on the breast. The king’s own brother had gone with him to help choose the design, the potboy said. No, not Lord Renly, the other one, Lord Stannis.
“胡萝卜和苹果。”奈德跟着念了一遍。听起来这小子能帮上的忙比其他几个人还要有限，而他已经是小指头所说那四人之中最后的一个了。乔里和每个人都分别谈过。修夫爵士脾气火爆，不肯多说，刚当上骑士就已经很骄傲。照他的话，倘若首相大人有意和他谈谈，他很乐于接见，但区区一个侍卫队长可没资格盘问他……就算这个侍卫队长大他十岁，剑术强他一百倍也没戏。那个厨房小妹总算还好沟通，她说琼恩大人读书读过头啦，还说他为小儿子的孱弱病体伤神担忧，对夫人又很粗暴。至于那个现在靠拉车维生的跑堂小厮，则从来没跟琼恩大人说过话。不过他倒是知道一堆厨房里的闲话：听说老爷近来常跟国王吵架，老爷嫌东西不好吃，老爷打算送他儿子到龙石岛当养子，老爷对养猎犬突然有了兴趣，老爷去找了个高明的武器师傅，委托他打造一副全新的铠甲，整件镀上白银，胸前安上一只蓝玉雕的猎鹰和珍珠母做的月亮。跑堂小弟说，是国王的弟弟亲自陪他去挑选材料和花样，喔不，不是蓝礼大人，是另外那个，史坦尼斯大人。
“Did our watchman recall anything else of note?”
“这守卫有没有提到什么值得留意的事？”
“The lad swears Lord Jon was as strong as a man half his age. Often went riding with Lord Stannis, he says.”
“小伙子发誓说琼恩大人同年纪小他一半的人一样健壮，还常跟史坦尼斯大人外出骑马。”
Stannis again , Ned thought. He found that curious. Jon Arryn and he had been cordial, but never friendly. And while Robert had been riding north to Winterfell, Stannis had removed himself to Dragonstone, the Targaryen island fastness he had conquered in his brother’s name. He had given no word as to when he might return. “Where did they go on these rides?” Ned asked.
又是史坦尼斯，奈德心想。这可奇了，琼恩·艾林和他固然礼尚往来，却从不亲近。当劳勃北访临冬城时，史坦尼斯也躲回了龙石岛——那座多年前他以哥哥的名义，从坦格利安家族手中夺来的海岛要塞——并只字未提何时归来。“他们都骑马上哪儿？”奈德问。
“The boy says that they visited a brothel.”
“那小子说上妓院去。”
“A brothel?” Ned said. “The Lord of the Eyrie and Hand of the King visited a brothel with Stannis Baratheon?” He shook his head, incredulous, wondering what Lord Renly would make of this tidbit. Robert’s lusts were the subject of ribald drinking songs throughout the realm, but Stannis was a different sort of man; a bare year younger than the king, yet utterly unlike him, stern, humorless, unforgiving, grim in his sense of duty.
“上妓院？”奈德道，“鹰巢城公爵、御前首相和史坦尼斯·拜拉席恩一起上妓院？”他难以置信地摇头，心里暗想要是蓝礼大人听了不知会作何反应。劳勃性好渔色举国皆知，成天有人拿来编歌取笑，但史坦尼斯可不一样。他虽只比国王小一岁，个性却是天壤之别：严峻、缺乏幽默感，从不轻易宽恕他人，重视责任到几近冷酷的地步。
“The boy insists it’s true. The Hand took three guardsmen with him, and the boy says they were joking of it when he took their horses afterward.”
“小伙子坚持说这是真的。首相大人随身带了三个侍卫，小伙子说事后帮他们牵马时，听见他们拿这事开玩笑。”
“Which brothel?” Ned asked.
“是哪家妓院？”奈德问。
“The boy did not know. The guards would.”
“小伙子也不知道，那几个侍卫应该知道。”
“A pity Lysa carried them off to the Vale,” Ned said dryly. “The gods are doing their best to vex us. Lady Lysa, Maester Colemon, Lord Stannis … everyone who might actually know the truth of what happened to Jon Arryn is a thousand leagues away.”
“只可惜莱莎把他们都带回艾林谷去了。”奈德干涩地说，“诸神真是想尽办法阻挠我们。莱莎夫人、柯蒙学士，还有史坦尼斯大人……每一个可能知道真相的人都在千里之外。”
“Will you summon Lord Stannis back from Dragonstone?”
“您要不要把史坦尼斯大人从龙石岛给召回来？”
“Not yet,” Ned said. “Not until I have a better notion of what this is all about and where he stands.” The matter nagged at him. Why did Stannis leave? Had he played some part in Jon Arryn’s murder? Or was he afraid? Ned found it hard to imagine what could frighten Stannis Baratheon, who had once held Storm’s End through a year of siege, surviving on rats and boot leather while the Lords Tyrell and Redwyne sat outside with their hosts, banqueting in sight of his walls.
“还不是时候，”奈德道，“等我进一步了解内情，并弄清楚他站在哪一边再说。”这事真教他心烦。史坦尼斯为何离开？难道谋害琼恩·艾林他也有份？难道他在害怕？奈德很难想像有什么能吓住史坦尼斯·拜拉席恩，当年他曾坚守风息堡长达一年之久，到最后提利尔公爵和雷德温伯爵的军队围在城外，成天饮酒作乐，城里却只能靠吃老鼠肉和鞋皮支撑。
“Bring me my doublet, if you would. The grey, with the direwolf sigil. I want this armorer to know who I am. It might make him more forthcoming.”
“麻烦你帮我把背心拿来，就灰色有冰原狼饰样的那件。我要让这个武器师傅知道我是谁，这样他或许会比较容易开口。”
Jory went to the wardrobe. “Lord Renly is brother to Lord Stannis as well as the king.”
乔里走到衣橱边。“蓝礼大人也是国王和史坦尼斯大人的弟弟。”
“Yet it seems that he was not invited on these rides.” Ned was not sure what to make of Renly, with all his friendly ways and easy smiles. A few days past, he had taken Ned aside to show him an exquisite rose gold locklet. Inside was a miniature painted in the vivid Myrish style, of a lovely young girl with doe’s eyes and a cascade of soft brown hair. Renly had seemed anxious to know if the girl reminded him of anyone, and when Ned had no answer but a shrug, he had seemed disappointed. The maid was Loras Tyrell’s sister Margaery, he’d confessed, but there were those who said she looked like Lyanna. “No,” Ned had told him, bemused. Could it be that Lord Renly, who looked so like a young Robert, had conceived a passion for a girl he fancied to be a young Lyanna? That struck him as more than passing queer.
“但他们骑马却没找他作伴，”虽然蓝礼态度友善又笑口常开，奈德仍旧摸不清他的立场。前几天，他把奈德拉到一边，向他展示一个精雕细琢的黄金玫瑰坠子，里面有张密尔画风的鲜活肖像，画中人是个生着雌鹿般眸子和一头柔软棕发的可爱少女。蓝礼似乎急于知道女孩是否让他联想起什么人，当奈德答不上来，只耸了耸肩时，他似乎相当失望。女孩是洛拉斯·提利尔的妹妹玛格丽，后来他坦承，不过有人说她长得像莱安娜。“不像啊。”奈德困惑地告诉他。难道说长得像劳勃年轻时的蓝礼，暗中爱慕着这位在他看来长得像年轻的莱安娜的女孩？真是怪事一桩。
Jory held out the doublet, and Ned slid his hands through the armholes. “Perhaps Lord Stannis will return for Robert’s tourney,” he said as Jory laced the garment up the back.
乔里递过背心，奈德把手穿进臂口。“或许史坦尼斯大人会回来参加劳勃的比武大会。”他边说边让乔里替他将衣服带子在后腰处系上结。
“That would be a stroke of fortune, my lord,” Jory said.
“那可就真是诸神眷顾了，老爷。”乔里说。
Ned buckled on a longsword. “In other words, not bloody likely.” His smile was grim.
奈德系上一柄长剑。“换言之，大概他妈的不可能。”他无奈地笑笑。
Jory draped Ned’s cloak across his shoulders and clasped it at the throat with the Hand’s badge of office. “The armorer lives above his shop, in a large house at the top of the Street of Steel. Alyn knows the way, my lord.”
乔里把奈德的披风搭上他的肩膀，在喉咙的地方用首相的徽章扣住。“这武器师傅住在他店面楼上，就钢铁街顶的一栋大房子。埃林认得路，老爷。”
Ned nodded. “The gods help this potboy if he’s sent me off haring after shadows.” It was a slim enough staff to lean on, but the Jon Arryn that Ned Stark had known was not one to wear jeweled and silvered plate. Steel was steel; it was meant for protection, not ornament. He might have changed his views, to be sure. He would scarcely have been the first man who came to look on things differently after a few years at court … but the change was marked enough to make Ned wonder.
奈德点点头。“要是这拉车小厮撒谎，就只有天上诸神能救他了。”虽然这实在不像是条可靠的线索，但奈德·史塔克所认识的琼恩·艾林可不会穿什么镶珠宝的银铠甲。他说过：铠甲就是铠甲，用来防身，而非装饰。当然，他也有可能改变想法，在宫里待过十几年，再怎么也不可能和从前一模一样……然而这个转变未免太大，奈德实在无法释怀。
“Is there any other service I might perform?”
“还有什么需要我效劳？”
“I suppose you’d best begin visiting whorehouses.”
“你可以准备上妓院了。”
“Hard duty, my lord.” Jory grinned. “The men will be glad to help. Porther has made a fair start already.”
“老爷，这是苦差事啊。”乔里嘻嘻笑道，“我想大伙儿都会很乐意帮忙，波瑟早就迫不及待，自己先去了。”
Ned’s favorite horse was saddled and waiting in the yard. Varly and Jacks fell in beside him as he rode through the yard. Their steel caps and shirts of mail must have been sweltering, yet they said no word of complaint. As Lord Eddard passed beneath the King’s Gate into the stink of the city, his grey and white cloak streaming from his shoulders, he saw eyes everywhere and kicked his mount into a trot. His guard followed.
奈德最心爱的坐骑已经上好马鞍，正在庭院里等他。他穿过场子，瓦利和杰克斯一左一右跟了上来。在这种大热天，穿戴钢头盔和铠甲一定汗流浃背，但他们半声怨言也无。艾德公爵身披灰白相间的长披风，策马穿过国王大门，进入臭气四溢的城区，立时感觉到四处都是眼线。他一踢马肚，绝尘而去，两名侍卫紧跟在后。
He looked behind him frequently as they made their way through the crowded city streets. Tomard and Desmond had left the castle early this morning to take up positions on the route they must take, and watch for anyone following them, but even so, Ned was uncertain. The shadow of the King’s Spider and his little birds had him fretting like a maiden on her wedding night.
他们在拥挤的街道间穿梭，他频频回头。虽说托马德和戴斯蒙今天一大早便离开城堡，守在他们必经之路上，负责注意是否有人跟踪，但奈德还是不放心。活在国王的八脚蜘蛛及其鹰犬的阴影下，他就像洞房花烛夜的新嫁娘一样害怕。
The Street of Steel began at the market square beside the River Gate, as it was named on maps, or the Mud Gate, as it was commonly called. A mummer on stilts was striding through the throngs like some great insect, with a horde of barefoot children trailing behind him, hooting. Elsewhere, two ragged boys no older than Bran were dueling with sticks, to the loud encouragement of some and the furious curses of others. An old woman ended the contest by leaning out of her window and emptying a bucket of slops on the heads of the combatants. In the shadow of the wall, farmers stood beside their wagons, bellowing out, “Apples, the best apples, cheap at twice the price,” and “Blood melons, sweet as honey,” and “Turnips, onions, roots, here you go here, here you go, turnips, onions, roots, here you go here.”
钢铁街从临河门旁的市集广场开始延伸。这临河门乃是地图上标记的名字，老百姓平常都唤它作“烂泥门”。街上，有个戏子正踩着高跷，像只巨型怪虫般大跨步走在人群里，后面跟了一大群光着脚丫的小孩，尖声怪叫着。另外一边则有两个衣衫褴褛，年纪跟布兰差不多的男孩正拿着木棍来往比划，围观群众有的大声喝采，有的气恼咒骂。最后一名老太婆从窗户里探出头，把一桶洗脚水倒在两个男生头上，才算终止了这场打斗。农民们躲在城墙的阴影下，站在他们的货车旁高声吆喝着：“苹果，上好的苹果哟，价钱再高一倍你都会觉得便宜哟，”或是“来买血甜瓜喔，甜得跟蜂蜜一样喔！”以及“大头菜、洋葱、马铃薯，来来来，大头菜、洋葱、马铃薯哟，来来来喔！”
The Mud Gate was open, and a squad of City Watchmen stood under the portcullis in their golden cloaks, leaning on spears. When a column of riders appeared from the west, the guardsmen sprang into action, shouting commands and moving the carts and foot traffic aside to let the knight enter with his escort. The first rider through the gate carried a long black banner. The silk rippled in the wind like a living thing; across the fabric was blazoned a night sky slashed with purple lightning. “Make way for Lord Beric!” the rider shouted. “Make way for Lord Beric!” And close behind came the young lord himself, a dashing figure on a black courser, with red-gold hair and a black satin cloak dusted with stars. “Here to fight in the Hand’s tourney, my lord?” a guardsman called out to him. “Here to win the Hand’s tourney,” Lord Beric shouted back as the crowd cheered.
烂泥门大大敞开，一小队都城守卫肩披制式的金色披风，拄着长矛站在闸门下。眼看西边来了一群排成纵队骑马飞奔的人，守卫们急忙发号施令，把挡路的推车和行人赶开，好让骑士和他的随从通过。当先穿过大门的人高举一面长长的黑旗，丝织的旌旗在风中飞扬，仿如活物。旗帜上绣着一道划过夜空的紫色闪电。“贝里大人驾到！速速回避！”来者高喊，“贝里大人驾到！速速回避！”紧跟在后的正是那位金红头发的年轻贵族，他身披黑缎星纹披风，骑匹黑色骏马，十足浮华模样。“您是来参加首相比武大会的吗，大人？”一名守卫在他身后叫道。“我是来拿比武大会冠军的！”贝里伯爵在群众欢呼声中高声回应。
Ned turned off the square where the Street of Steel began and followed its winding path up a long hill, past blacksmiths working at open forges, freeriders haggling over mail shirts, and grizzled ironmongers selling old blades and razors from their wagons. The farther they climbed, the larger the buildings grew. The man they wanted was all the way at the top of the hill, in a huge house of timber and plaster whose upper stories loomed over the narrow street. The double doors showed a hunting scene carved in ebony and weirwood. A pair of stone knights stood sentry at the entrance, armored in fanciful suits of polished red steel that transformed them into griffin and unicorn. Ned left his horse with Jacks and shouldered his way inside.
奈德离开广场，转进钢铁街，沿着蜿蜒小路骑上长长的维桑尼亚丘陵，沿途经过在锻炉前干活的铁匠，拿着盔甲讨价还价的自由骑手，以及头发灰白，兜售着马车上各种旧铁陈刀的铁器贩子。他们越爬越高，建筑物也更显高大，城里绝大多数铁匠都在此地。他们要找的人住在丘顶，有一栋用木材和石膏搭成、楼层足以俯瞰下方狭窄巷道的巨大屋子。房子的两扇大门乃是黑檀木和鱼梁木所制，上面刻画着一幅打猎图，一对石雕骑士守在入口两侧，披挂着造型天马行空的红钢铠甲，使他们有了鹰头狮和独角兽的形态。奈德把马交给杰克斯，侧身走进屋内。
The slim young serving girl took quick note of Ned’s badge and the sigil on his doublet, and the master came hurrying out, all smiles and bows. “Wine for the King’s Hand,” he told the girl, gesturing Ned to a couch. “I am Tobho Mott, my lord, please, please, put yourself at ease.” He wore a black velvet coat with hammers embroidered on the sleeves in silver thread. Around his neck was a heavy silver chain and a sapphire as large as a pigeon’s egg. “If you are in need of new arms for the Hand’s tourney, you have come to the right shop.” Ned did not bother to correct him. “My work is costly, and I make no apologies for that, my lord,” he said as he filled two matching silver goblets. “You will not find craftsmanship equal to mine anywhere in the Seven Kingdoms, I promise you. Visit every forge in King’s Landing if you like, and compare for yourself. Any village smith can hammer out a shirt of mail; my work is art.”
瘦小的女侍眼尖，立刻认出奈德的徽章和背心上的家徽，没过多久屋主便急急忙忙出来迎接，满脸堆笑，忙着打躬作揖。“快帮首相大人倒酒。”他对女孩说，然后示意奈德在长椅落座。“大人，我叫托布·莫特，您请坐，把这儿当自个儿家罢。”他穿着黑天鹅绒外套，袖子上用银线绣了铁锤的图案，颈项间则戴了条沉重的银链，上面那颗蓝宝石有鸽子蛋那么大。“如果您需要在首相比武大会上穿的新铠甲，那您可来对地方了。”奈德已经懒得纠正了。“大人，我做的东西要价很高，这我自己也承认，”他边说边把两只成对的银制高脚杯斟满酒。“不过我敢跟您保证，七国上下再找不到手艺能跟我比的人。您若是不信，大可把君临每一家打铁铺都走过一遍，自己比较比较。其实打件盔甲，随便一个乡下铁匠都会。我打出来的是艺术品。”
Ned sipped his wine and let the man go on. The Knight of Flowers bought all his armor here, Tobho boasted, and many high lords, the ones who knew fine steel, and even Lord Renly, the king’s own brother. Perhaps the Hand had seen Lord Renly’s new armor, the green plate with the golden antlers? No other armorer in the city could get that deep a green; he knew the secret of putting color in the steel itself, paint and enamel were the crutches of a journeyman. Or mayhaps the Hand wanted a blade? Tobho had learned to work Valyrian steel at the forges of Qohor as a boy. Only a man who knew the spells could take old weapons and forge them anew. “The direwolf is the sigil of House Stark, is it not? I could fashion a direwolf helm so real that children will run from you in the street,” he vowed.
奈德啜着酒，听他继续往下说。照托布吹嘘，不仅百花骑士整套铠甲都是在这里买的，许多真正识货的官家老爷也都是常客，更别提国王陛下的亲弟弟蓝礼大人了。不知首相大人可曾见过蓝礼大人的新行头？就是那件绿甲和黄金鹿角盔。除了他，城里没有别的武器师傅能做出那么深的绿色，因为他小时候在科霍尔当学徒时学会了将颜色渗进精钢里的秘诀，相较之下，涂漆或上釉根本只是小孩子把戏。还是首相大人要把好剑？托布说他在科霍尔也习得了打造瓦雷利亚钢的技术，只有知道正确咒语的人才有办法使老旧的武器焕然一新。“史塔克家族的纹章是冰原狼，对不对？我可以帮您打顶冰原狼头盔，保管走在路上小孩看了就跑。”他拍胸脯保证。
Ned smiled. “Did you make a falcon helm for Lord Arryn?”
奈德微微一笑。“这么说来，你也帮艾林大人打了顶猎鹰头盔？”
Tobho Mott paused a long moment and set aside his wine. “The Hand did call upon me, with Lord Stannis, the king’s brother. I regret to say, they did not honor me with their patronage.”
托布·莫特闻言，停顿了很长时间，最后他放下酒杯：“首相大人他是找过我，跟国王陛下的大弟史坦尼斯大人一起来的。遗憾的是我没那个荣幸，不曾为他们效劳。”
Ned looked at the man evenly, saying nothing, waiting. He had found over the years that silence sometimes yielded more than questions. And so it was this time.
奈德平静地看着他，什么也不说，只静静地等待。这些年来，他发现沉默常常比发问更有效，眼下正是如此。
“They asked to see the boy,” the armorer said, “so I took them back to the forge.”
“他们说要见见那孩子，”武器师傅道，“所以我带他们去了锻炉。”
“The boy,” Ned echoed. He had no notion who the boy might be. “I should like to see the boy as well.”
“那孩子，”奈德跟着重复。他根本不知道那孩子是谁。“我也想见见那孩子。”
Tobho Mott gave him a cool, careful look. “As you wish, my lord,” he said with no trace of his former friendliness. He led Ned out a rear door and across a narrow yard, back to the cavernous stone barn where the work was done. When the armorer opened the door, the blast of hot air that came through made Ned feel as though he were walking into a dragon’s mouth. Inside, a forge blazed in each corner, and the air stank of smoke and sulfur. Journeymen armorers glanced up from their hammers and tongs just long enough to wipe the sweat from their brows, while bare-chested apprentice boys worked the bellows.
托布·莫特冷静而谨慎地看了他一眼。“遵命，大人。”他先前的友善语气已经消失无踪。他领着奈德走出后门，穿越一个狭长的庭院，进入宽敞的石砌谷仓，铁匠铺的实际工作就是在这里进行。武器师傅刚开门，一股热气便向外喷涌而出，教奈德觉得自己仿佛要步入火龙口中。每个角落都有一座熊熊燃烧的锻炉，空气里充溢着烟硝和硫磺的臭味。铁匠工头抬头瞄了一眼，只来得及抹抹额际汗珠，便又继续挥舞铁锤和钳子，打着赤膊的学徒则努力鼓动风炉。
The master called over a tall lad about Robb’s age, his arms and chest corded with muscle. “This is Lord Stark, the new Hand of the King,” he told him as the boy looked at Ned through sullen blue eyes and pushed back sweat-soaked hair with his fingers. Thick hair, shaggy and unkempt and black as ink. The shadow of a new beard darkened his jaw. “This is Gendry. Strong for his age, and he works hard. Show the Hand that helmet you made, lad.” Almost shyly, the boy led them to his bench, and a steel helm shaped like a bull’s head, with two great curving horns.
武器师傅把一个年龄大约与罗柏相若，两臂和胸膛都是结实肌肉的高大男孩叫过来。“这就是史塔克大人，国王新任的首相。”男孩一边听他说，一边以他那双阴沉的蓝眼睛打量奈德，并用手指把汗水浸湿的头发往后拨。他的头发又粗又厚，乱成一团，如墨水般漆黑。他下巴刚长出点黑胡渣。“这是詹德利，以他这年纪算得强壮，干起活来也挺勤快。小子，让首相大人瞧瞧你打的那顶头盔罢。”男孩有些害羞地领他们走到他休息的长凳，将一顶状如牛头，还有两只弧形牛角的头盔拿给奈德看。
Ned turned the helm over in his hands. It was raw steel, unpolished but expertly shaped. “This is fine work. I would be pleased if you would let me buy it.”
奈德拿来反复把玩，这头盔是粗钢制成，未经雕琢，但造型却是行家里手。“做得很好，不知你可否愿意卖给我？”
The boy snatched it out of his hands. “It’s not for sale.”
男孩一把从他手中抢过头盔。“这不是拿来卖的。”
Tobho Mott looked horror-struck. “Boy, this is the King’s Hand. If his lordship wants this helm, make him a gift of it. He honors you by asking.”
托布·莫特一脸惊恐。“小子，这可是首相大人哪，大人他看得上眼，你还不快送给他，他光开口问已经很给你面子了。”
“I made it for me,” the boy said stubbornly.
“我做了给自己戴的。”男孩倔强地说。
“A hundred pardons, my lord,” his master said hurriedly to Ned. “The boy is crude as new steel, and like new steel would profit from some beating. That helm is journeyman’s work at best. Forgive him and I promise I will craft you a helm like none you have ever seen.”
“大人，真是千万个对不起，”他的主人急忙对奈德说：“这小子倔得跟生铁似的，生铁就是欠打。不过这头盔也不是什么值钱家什，若您肯原谅他，我保证为您打一顶前所未有的上等货色。”
“He’s done nothing that requires my forgiveness. Gendry, when Lord Arryn came to see you, what did you talk about?”
“他又没做错事，我没什么好原谅的。詹德利，艾林大人来看你时，你们都说了些什么？”
“He asked me questions is all, m’lord.”
“大人，他不过就问了些问题。”
“What sort of questions?”
“什么问题？”
The boy shrugged. “How was I, and was I well treated, and if I liked the work, and stuff about my mother. Who she was and what she looked like and all.”
男孩耸肩道：“问我过得好不好啊，主人待我如何啊，我喜不喜欢这差事啊，还有我妈的事，问她是谁、长得怎么样这些。”
“What did you tell him?” Ned asked.
“你怎么回答？”
The boy shoved a fresh fall of black hair off his forehead. “She died when I was little. She had yellow hair, and sometimes she used to sing to me, I remember. She worked in an alehouse.”
男孩拨开一撮新垂下的黑发。“我还小的时候她就死了。我只记得她的头发是黄色的，有时会唱歌给我听。她在酒馆里做事。”
“Did Lord Stannis question you as well?”
“史坦尼斯大人也问过你问题吗？”
“The bald one? No, not him. He never said no word, just glared at me, like I was some raper who done for his daughter.”
“光头的那个？没，他没问。他都不说话，光盯着我瞧，好像我上了他女儿似的。”
“Mind your filthy tongue,” the master said. “This is the King’s own Hand.” The boy lowered his eyes. “A smart boy, but stubborn. That helm … the others call him bullheaded, so he threw it in their teeth.”
“讲话当心点，”师傅说，“你是在和国王的首相大人说话。”男孩低下头。“这孩子聪明，偏偏就是拗。瞧这头盔……别人骂他牛脾气，他就打顶牛头盔来气他们。”
Ned touched the boy’s head, fingering the thick black hair. “Look at me, Gendry.” The apprentice lifted his face. Ned studied the shape of his jaw, the eyes like blue ice. Yes , he thought, I see it . “Go back to your work, lad. I’m sorry to have bothered you.” He walked back to the house with the master. “Who paid the boy’s apprentice fee?” he asked lightly.
奈德摸摸男孩的头，轻搓着他粗黑的头发。“詹德利，看着我。”小学徒抬起头，奈德仔细审视着他下巴的轮廓，还有那对冷若冰霜的蓝眼睛。是了，他心想，我知道了。“去干活罢，小伙子。抱歉打扰你。”他随武器师傅走回屋里。“这孩子的见习费是谁付的？”他轻描淡写地问。
Mott looked fretful. “You saw the boy. Such a strong boy. Those hands of his, those hands were made for hammers. He had such promise, I took him on without a fee.”
莫特看上去相当害怕。“您自己也看到了，这孩子强壮得很，还有他那双手，天生就是打铁的料，这孩子有潜力，所以我没收见习费。”
“The truth now,” Ned urged. “The streets are full of strong boys. The day you take on an apprentice without a fee will be the day the Wall comes down. Who paid for him?”
“跟我说实话，”奈德催促他，“强壮的小伙子满街都是。除非长城倒塌，否则你不可能不收见习费。到底是谁付的？”
“A lord,” the master said reluctantly. “He gave no name, and wore no sigil on his coat. He paid in gold, twice the customary sum, and said he was paying once for the boy, and once for my silence.”
“是个官家老爷，”武器师傅很不情愿地说，“他没说自己的名姓，外衣上也没有家徽。他拿出手的是金子，而且付了平常的双倍，说一半是孩子的见习费，另一半是要我别说出去。”
“Describe him.”
“说说他长什么样。”
“He was stout, round of shoulder, not so tall as you. Brown beard, but there was a bit of red in it, I’ll swear. He wore a rich cloak, that I do remember, heavy purple velvet worked with silver threads, but the hood shadowed his face and I never did see him clear.” He hesitated a moment. “My lord, I want no trouble.”
“他很粗壮，宽肩膀，但没您高。棕色的胡子，似乎还杂了点红。我倒是记得他穿的披风，高档货，扎实的紫天鹅绒料子，滚了银边，可兜帽遮住了他的脸，我看不清楚。”他迟疑了一下。“大人，我不想惹麻烦。”
“None of us wants trouble, but I fear these are troubled times, Master Mott,” Ned said. “You know who the boy is.”
“谁都不想惹麻烦。可是莫特师傅，恐怕这是个麻烦的年代。”奈德道，“你很清楚这孩子是谁。”
“I am only an armorer, my lord. I know what I’m told.”
“大人，我只是个武器师傅，不知道什么我不该知道的事。”
“You know who the boy is,” Ned repeated patiently. “That is not a question.”
“你很清楚这孩子是谁，”奈德耐心地重复一遍。“我可不是问你知不知道。”
“The boy is my apprentice,” the master said. He looked Ned in the eye, stubborn as old iron. “Who he was before he came to me, that’s none of my concern.”
“这孩子是我的学徒，”武器师傅说。他迎视奈德的目光，眼神固执得如钢铁一般。“他来我这儿以前是谁，那不干我的事。”
Ned nodded. He decided that he liked Tobho Mott, master armorer. “If the day ever comes when Gendry would rather wield a sword than forge one, send him to me. He has the look of a warrior. Until then, you have my thanks, Master Mott, and my promise. Should I ever want a helm to frighten children, this will be the first place I visit.”
奈德点点头，觉得自己还挺喜欢托布·莫特这位武器大师。“哪天要是詹德利不想继续铸剑，想要实际弄把刀玩玩的话，叫他来找我，我看他是块当兵的料。在那之前呢，莫特师傅，我谢谢你照顾他。我跟你保证，若是我想弄顶头盔来吓吓小孩，一定第一个找你。”
His guard was waiting outside with the horses. “Did you find anything, my lord?” Jacks asked as Ned mounted up.
他的侍卫牵马等在外面。“老爷，您查出什么了吗？”奈德上马时，杰克斯开口问。
“I did,” Ned told him, wondering. What had Jon Arryn wanted with a king’s bastard, and why was it worth his life?
“有的。”奈德告诉他，自己却思绪满怀。琼恩·艾林找国王的私生子做什么？到底什么事值得他连命都赔上？
*CATELYN
第二十九章 凯特琳
“M y lady, you ought cover your head,” Ser Rodrik told her as their horses plodded north. “You will take a chill.”
“夫人，您还是把头包住，”他们骑马踽踽北行，途中罗德利克爵士一再告诫她，“不然会着凉的。”
“It is only water, Ser Rodrik,” Catelyn replied. Her hair hung wet and heavy, a loose strand stuck to her forehead, and she could imagine how ragged and wild she must look, but for once she did not care. The southern rain was soft and warm. Catelyn liked the feel of it on her face, gentle as a mother’s kisses. It took her back to her childhood, to long grey days at Riverrun. She remembered the godswood, drooping branches heavy with moisture, and the sound of her brother’s laughter as he chased her through piles of damp leaves. She remembered making mud pies with Lysa, the weight of them, the mud slick and brown between her fingers. They had served them to Littlefinger, giggling, and he’d eaten so much mud he was sick for a week. How young they all had been.
“罗德利克爵士，淋点雨没什么大不了。”凯特琳回答。她的湿头发沉甸甸地垂下来，一撮松掉的发束黏贴在额头上，不难想像自己的模样有多狼狈，但这次她却不在乎。南国的雨柔软而温和，凯特琳喜欢用脸颊去体会这种轻如慈母亲吻的感觉。这感觉将她带回到童年时代，忆起在奔流城度过的那些灰蒙蒙的日子。她记得饱溢湿气的神木林，枝干低垂；记得弟弟追着她跑过一堆堆湿叶，笑声清脆。她也记得和莱莎玩泥巴的种种情景，记得泥团在手中的重量，滑溜的褐泞在指间流动的感觉。后来，她们咯咯笑着把做好的泥饼端给小指头吃，他竟当真吃了一堆，足足病了一个星期。啊，记得当时年纪还小。
Catelyn had almost forgotten. In the north, the rain fell cold and hard, and sometimes at night it turned to ice. It was as likely to kill a crop as nurture it, and it sent grown men running for the nearest shelter. That was no rain for little girls to play in.
凯特琳本以为自己早已忘却了这些事。北境的雨寒冷而无情，有时入夜还会成霜。说是滋养生殖，转眼就变成作物杀手，连成人遇上也纷纷走避。这种雨，哪是给小女孩玩的呢？
“I am soaked through,” Ser Rodrik complained. “Even my bones are wet.” The woods pressed close around them, and the steady pattering of rain on leaves was accompanied by the small sucking sounds their horses made as their hooves pulled free of the mud. “We will want a fire tonight, my lady, and a hot meal would serve us both.”
“全身都湿透了，”罗德利克爵士抱怨，“湿到骨子里去了。”他们周围树林浓密，叶梢的落雨声伴着马蹄行走泥泞的响动。“夫人，我们今晚该找个有火的地方歇歇，若能吃点热东西更好。”
“There is an inn at the crossroads up ahead,” Catelyn told him. She had slept many a night there in her youth, traveling with her father. Lord Hoster Tully had been a restless man in his prime, always riding somewhere. She still remembered the innkeep, a fat woman named Masha Heddle who chewed sourleaf night and day and seemed to have an endless supply of smiles and sweet cakes for the children. The sweet cakes had been soaked with honey, rich and heavy on the tongue, but how Catelyn had dreaded those smiles. The sourleaf had stained Masha’s teeth a dark red, and made her smile a bloody horror.
“前面路口有家旅店。”凯特琳告诉他。她年轻时与父亲外出曾多次在此借宿。霍斯特·徒利公爵壮年时在城里待不住，总是骑马到处晃荡。她还记得旅馆主人是个不分昼夜嚼着烟叶、名叫玛莎·海德的胖女人。玛莎似乎永远都是笑容满面，还常拿蛋糕给孩子们吃。她的蛋糕浸过蜂蜜，吃起来香味浓郁。只是凯特琳很怕她的笑容，因为烟草把牙齿染成了暗红色，笑起来似乎血淋淋，怪吓人的。
“An inn,” Ser Rodrik repeated wistfully. “If only … but we dare not risk it. If we wish to remain unknown, I think it best we seek out some small holdfast …” He broke off as they heard sounds up the road; splashing water, the clink of mail, a horse’s whinny. “Riders,” he warned, his hand dropping to the hilt of his sword. Even on the kingsroad, it never hurt to be wary.
“有旅馆当然好，”罗德利克爵士满心向往地重复了一遍。“不过……我们最好还是别冒险，为了避免被人认出，还是找家民居借宿比较妥……”这时路上传来盔甲铿锵、马匹嘶鸣和雨水溅洒的声音，他急忙住口。“有人。”他一边出声警告，一边伸手握住剑柄。即便是在国王大道，小心谨慎也绝对有益无害。
They followed the sounds around a lazy bend of the road and saw them; a column of armed men noisily fording a swollen stream. Catelyn reined up to let them pass. The banner in the hand of the foremost rider hung sodden and limp, but the guardsmen wore indigo cloaks and on their shoulders flew the silver eagle of Seagard. “Mallisters,” Ser Rodrik whispered to her, as if she had not known. “My lady, best pull up your hood.”
他们循声而去，绕过一个慵懒的弯道，看见那一群成纵队行进的人马，全副武装，正嘈杂地渡过涨水的溪流。凯特琳拉住缰绳让他们先行。骑在队伍前列的人高举的旗帜已然湿透，垂挂下来，看不清晰。但来人都穿着蓝紫色的披风，海疆城的银色飞鹰纹章在肩头飞扬。“是梅利斯特家的人。”罗德利克爵士朝她耳语，生怕她不知道。“夫人，我看您还是把兜帽拉起来吧。”
Catelyn made no move. Lord Jason Mallister himself rode with them, surrounded by his knights, his son Patrek by his side and their squires close behind. They were riding for King’s Landing and the Hand’s tourney, she knew. For the past week, the travelers had been thick as flies upon the kingsroad; knights and freeriders, singers with their harps and drums, heavy wagons laden with hops or corn or casks of honey, traders and craftsmen and whores, and all of them moving south.
凯特琳没有照办。杰森·梅利斯特伯爵本人就在队伍里面，骑士们围绕四周，身边是儿子派崔克，侍从们则跟在后方。她一眼就看出他们是赶往君临参加首相的比武大会。过去这一个星期，国王大道上到处都是骑士和自由骑手，带着竖琴和皮鼓的吟游诗人，满载啤酒花、玉米和一桶桶蜂蜜的马车，还有生意人，工匠和妓女，汹涌的人潮使得国王大道拥挤不堪，所有人都往南走。
She studied Lord Jason boldly. The last time she had seen him he had been jesting with her uncle at her wedding feast; the Mallisters stood bannermen to the Tullys, and his gifts had been lavish. His brown hair was salted with white now, his face chiseled gaunt by time, yet the years had not touched his pride. He rode like a man who feared nothing. Catelyn envied him that; she had come to fear so much. As the riders passed, Lord Jason nodded a curt greeting, but it was only a high lord’s courtesy to strangers chance met on the road. There was no recognition in those fierce eyes, and his son did not even waste a look.
她不顾被认出的风险，好好地打量了杰森伯爵一番。上次见他还是在她婚宴之上，当时他只顾着和她叔叔说笑。梅利斯特家族是徒利家族的臣属，此人出手送礼向来大方。如今他的棕发间杂了几丝白色，岁月把他的脸庞凿出了痕迹，却并未减损他的骄傲，他骑在马上的神情天不怕地不怕。凯特琳实在羡慕，她自己担惊受怕可太多了。他们经过时，杰森男爵简单地点头致意，但那只是贵族老爷路遇陌生人时的基本礼貌。那双锐利的眼睛并没有认出她，而他儿子则根本连看都懒得看。
“He did not know you,” Ser Rodrik said after, wondering.
“他竟没认出您。”之后罗德利克爵士疑惑地说。
“He saw a pair of mud-spattered travelers by the side of the road, wet and tired. It would never occur to him to suspect that one of them was the daughter of his liege lord. I think we shall be safe enough at the inn, Ser Rodrik.”
“他只看到两个又湿又累，溅满泥浆的旅人站在路边，绝想不到其中一个会是他主子的女儿。我想我们就算进了旅馆也会很安全的，罗德利克爵士。”
It was near dark when they reached it, at the crossroads north of the great confluence of the Trident. Masha Heddle was fatter and greyer than Catelyn remembered, still chewing her sourleaf, but she gave them only the most cursory of looks, with nary a hint of her ghastly red smile. “Two rooms at the top of the stair, that’s all there is,” she said, chewing all the while. “They’re under the bell tower, you won’t be missing meals, though there’s some thinks it too noisy. Can’t be helped. We’re full up, or near as makes no matter. It’s those rooms or the road.”
旅馆位于三河汇流处以北的岔路口，他们抵达时天已快黑。玛莎·海德还在嚼她的烟草，比凯特琳记忆中胖了点，头发也灰白了些，好在她只草草瞟了他们一眼，没有露出恐怖的血腥微笑。“只剩楼上两间客房，别的没了，”她一边说，嘴里一边嚼个没完。“两间都在钟塔下，所以不用担心错过用餐，只是有人会嫌吵。没办法，人太多，我们差不多客满了。如果不要，就请两位上路。”
It was those rooms, low, dusty garrets at the top of a cramped narrow staircase. “Leave your boots down here,” Masha told them after she’d taken their coin. “The boy will clean them. I won’t have you tracking mud up my stairs. Mind the bell. Those who come late to meals don’t eat.” There were no smiles, and no mention of sweet cakes.
他们当然要。房间在低矮积尘的阁楼内，要经过狭窄老旧的楼梯爬上去。“把鞋子留在这儿，”玛莎收了钱后告诉他们，“伙计待会儿来清理。我可不想看你们踩着烂泥上楼。注意钟声，来晚了就没得吃了。”她脸上没有笑容，也只字未提香甜的蛋糕。
When the supper bell rang, the sound was deafening. Catelyn had changed into dry clothes. She sat by the window, watching rain run down the pane. The glass was milky and full of bubbles, and a wet dusk was falling outside. Catelyn could just make out the muddy crossing where the two great roads met.
当晚餐的钟声真的敲响时，简直震耳欲聋。凯特琳换了干衣服，正坐在窗边，凝视雨滴溜下窗棂。玻璃模糊不清，水珠密布，雨夜正要降临。凯特琳勉强分辨得出两条大路交会处的泥泞渡口。
The crossroads gave her pause. If they turned west from here, it was an easy ride down to Riverrun. Her father had always given her wise counsel when she needed it most, and she yearned to talk to him, to warn him of the gathering storm. If Winterfell needed to brace for war, how much more so Riverrun, so much closer to King’s Landing, with the power of Casterly Rock looming to the west like a shadow. If only her father had been stronger, she might have chanced it, but Hoster Tully had been bedridden these past two years, and Catelyn was loath to tax him now.
看到岔路，她飘忽的视线不禁停了下来。假如他们由此向西，便可轻松愉快地抵达奔流城。父亲总会在她需要的时候给予睿智的建议，她也渴望和他谈谈，警告他即将来临的风暴。倘若临冬城当真不免一战，奔流城更是首当其冲，因为它既靠近君临，西面又有如阴影般的凯岩城势力。若是父亲身体健康一点，她或许还会考虑，然而霍斯特·徒利卧病在床已有两年之久，凯特琳不愿再加重他的负担。
The eastern road was wilder and more dangerous, climbing through rocky foothills and thick forests into the Mountains of the Moon, past high passes and deep chasms to the Vale of Arryn and the stony Fingers beyond. Above the Vale, the Eyrie stood high and impregnable, its towers reaching for the sky. There she would find her sister … and, perhaps, some of the answers Ned sought. Surely Lysa knew more than she had dared to put in her letter. She might have the very proof that Ned needed to bring the Lannisters to ruin, and if it came to war, they would need the Arryns and the eastern lords who owed them service.
东边的路比较崎岖，也更险恶，攀越岩石山丘和浓密树林，进入明月山脉，再穿过陡峭隘口和深渊绝壁，则会到达艾林谷，以及更远处崎岖多石的五指半岛。雄立于艾林谷顶端的鹰巢城固若金汤，高塔直向天际。在那里她可以找到妹妹莱莎……或许还能找到某些奈德求索的答案。莱莎信里想必有所保留，不敢多说，说不定她正持有奈德需要的证据，足以导致兰尼斯特家的毁灭。倘若真的开战，他们也需要得到艾林家族和其臣属的东境贵族们的支持。
Yet the mountain road was perilous. Shadowcats prowled those passes, rock slides were common, and the mountain clans were lawless brigands, descending from the heights to rob and kill and melting away like snow whenever the knights rode out from the Vale in search of them. Even Jon Arryn, as great a lord as any the Eyrie had ever known, had always traveled in strength when he crossed the mountains. Catelyn’s only strength was one elderly knight, armored in loyalty.
然而山路崎岖难行，危机四伏。影子山猫四处出没不提，落石是常有的事，山区氏族部落更是目无法纪的盗匪，他们从峰峦间呼啸而至，杀人越货后，一见峡谷派出骑士追剿，便如积雪融化般消失得无影无踪。就连琼恩·艾林如此少见的英明领主，每次穿越山脉也必定带上大批人马。而此刻凯特琳惟一的人马是个老骑士，惟一的屏障是他的忠诚。
No, she thought, Riverrun and the Eyrie would have to wait. Her path ran north to Winterfell, where her sons and her duty were waiting for her. As soon as they were safely past the Neck, she could declare herself to one of Ned’s bannermen, and send riders racing ahead with orders to mount a watch on the kingsroad.
不，她想，奔流城和鹰巢城以后再说，此刻她应该北上直取临冬城，她的三个儿子和重责大任正对她翘首以盼。只等安然渡过颈泽，她便可对奈德的封臣宣布身份，然后派信使骑马先行，发布国王大道戒严的消息。
The rain obscured the fields beyond the crossroads, but Catelyn saw the land clear enough in her memory. The marketplace was just across the way, and the village a mile farther on, half a hundred white cottages surrounding a small stone sept. There would be more now; the summer had been long and peaceful. North of here the kingsroad ran along the Green Fork of the Trident, through fertile valleys and green woodlands, past thriving towns and stout holdfasts and the castles of the river lords.
雨丝遮蔽了岔路远方的田野，但凯特琳记忆里的风景依旧清晰。市集在路的那一头，再走一里有个村落，五十来间白色农舍围绕着一间小小的石砌圣堂。经过漫长而平静的夏季，如今村里的房舍想必更多了。由此向北，国王大道与三叉戟河的支流绿叉河平行，穿过肥沃谷地和青葱林荫，穿过繁荣市镇、坚实农庄以及河间贵族的城堡。
Catelyn knew them all: the Blackwoods and the Brackens, ever enemies, whose quarrels her father was obliged to settle; Lady Whent, last of her line, who dwelt with her ghosts in the cavernous vaults of Harrenhal; irascible Lord Frey, who had outlived seven wives and filled his twin castles with children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren, and bastards and grandbastards as well. All of them were bannermen to the Tullys, their swords sworn to the service of Riverrun. Catelyn wondered if that would be enough, if it came to war. Her father was the staunchest man who’d ever lived, and she had no doubt that he would call his banners … but would the banners come? The Darrys and Rygers and Mootons had sworn oaths to Riverrun as well, yet they had fought with Rhaegar Targaryen on the Trident, while Lord Frey had arrived with his levies well after the battle was over, leaving some doubt as to which army he had planned to join (theirs, he had assured the victors solemnly in the aftermath, but ever after her father had called him the Late Lord Frey). It must not come to war, Catelyn thought fervently. They must not let it.
凯特琳对每一位河间贵族都了若指掌：积怨已久的布莱伍德和布雷肯家族，每有纷争她父亲就得出面调停；身为家族最后传人的河安伯爵夫人蛰居于赫伦堡空寂的地窖里，整日与逝者相伴；暴躁的佛雷侯爵死了七任太太，他巍立大河两岸的孪河城里早已四代同堂，内家、外家、私生、百系，难以尽数。他们全都是徒利家的封臣，宣誓效忠于奔流城。但倘若战争真的爆发，凯特琳却不知道这样的阵容够不够坚强。父亲是世上最坚定最可靠的人，届时他一定会召集封臣……然而诸侯们都会来么？戴瑞家、莱格家和慕顿家虽然也都是奔流城的臣属，然而在三河之役中，他们却与雷加·坦格利安并肩作战。佛雷侯爵则是战争结束后方才带着人马姗姗来迟，不禁让人怀疑他原本打算为哪一边效力（事后，他郑重其事地向胜利者表示自己一直站在他们这一边，但从那以后父亲便改口叫他“迟到的佛雷侯爵”）。不能开战，凯特琳焦急地想，绝不能让战争爆发。
Ser Rodrik came for her just as the bell ceased its clangor. “We had best make haste if we hope to eat tonight, my lady.”
钟声停止，罗德利克爵士过来敲她房门。“夫人，我们快下去罢，不然恐怕吃不到东西了。”
“It might be safer if we were not knight and lady until we pass the Neck,” she told him. “Common travelers attract less notice. A father and daughter taken to the road on some family business, say.”
“过颈泽之前，我们不以爵士、夫人相称会比较安全，”她告诉他，“扮成寻常旅人不会引人注意。嗯，就说我们是父女出门探亲好了。”
“As you say, my lady,” Ser Rodrik agreed. It was only when she laughed that he realized what he’d done. “The old courtesies die hard, my—my daughter.” He tried to tug on his missing whiskers, and sighed with exasperation.
“那就这样办，夫人。”罗德利克爵士刚表同意，凯特琳便笑了起来，他才恍然大悟自己又说错了话。“习惯了，一时真改不过来，夫……女儿。”他伸手想捻他早已不见的胡子，不由得困窘地叹气。
Catelyn took his arm. “Come, Father,” she said. “You’ll find that Masha Heddle sets a good table, I think, but try not to praise her. You truly don’t want to see her smile.”
凯特琳挽起他的手。“来罢，老爹，”她说，“玛莎·海德烧得一手好菜，我想你会喜欢的。不过千万别当面夸她，她那张笑脸还是不看为妙。”
The common room was long and drafty, with a row of huge wooden kegs at one end and a fireplace at the other. A serving boy ran back and forth with skewers of meat while Masha drew beer from the kegs, chewing her sourleaf all the while.
大厅很长，通风良好，一边立着一排大木酒桶，另一边则是火炉。跑堂小弟拿着烤肉叉子跑来跑去，玛莎从酒桶里倒出啤酒，嘴里嚼的烟草却也没停。
The benches were crowded, townsfolk and farmers mingling freely with all manner of travelers. The crossroads made for odd companions; dyers with black and purple hands shared a bench with rivermen reeking of fish, an ironsmith thick with muscle squeezed in beside a wizened old septon, hard-bitten sellswords and soft plump merchants swapped news like boon companions.
长椅上座无虚席，村民和农夫与来历各异的旅客并肩而坐。一手黑一手紫的染坊师傅和满身鱼腥的讨河人坐在一起；浑身肌肉的铁匠缩着身子挤在瘦小的老修士旁边；一副硬汉模样的流浪武士和轻声细语的生意人像老友般交换着路上的消息。
The company included more swords than Catelyn would have liked. Three by the fire wore the red stallion badge of the Brackens, and there was a large party in blue steel ringmail and capes of a silvery grey. On their shoulder was another familiar sigil, the twin towers of House Frey. She studied their faces, but they were all too young to have known her. The senior among them would have been no older than Bran when she went north.
然而用餐的人里有太多带着刀剑，看得凯特琳有些担心。坐在炉边那三个佩着布雷肯家的红色骏马徽章，还有一大群身穿蓝钢环甲，肩披银灰披风的人，他们肩头所绣的正是她熟悉的佛雷家双塔纹章。她一一打量他们的脸，但他们年纪都太小，认不出来。里面年纪稍长的，在她嫁到北方时也不过是布兰现在的年龄。
Ser Rodrik found them an empty place on the bench near the kitchen. Across the table a handsome youth was fingering a woodharp. “Seven blessings to you, goodfolk,” he said as they sat. An empty wine cup stood on the table before him.
罗德利克爵士在靠近厨房的长椅上找到两个位子，饭桌对面坐了个英俊的年轻人，手里正拨弄着木头竖琴。“好心人，七神保佑你们。”他们坐下时他开口道。一个空酒杯摆在他面前。
“And to you, singer,” Catelyn returned. Ser Rodrik called for bread and meat and beer in a tone that meant now . The singer, a youth of some eighteen years, eyed them boldly and asked where they were going, and from whence they had come, and what news they had, letting the questions fly as quick as arrows and never pausing for an answer. “We left King’s Landing a fortnight ago,” Catelyn replied, answering the safest of his questions.
“也保佑你，好歌手。”凯特琳回答。罗德利克爵士用一种“现在就要”的口气叫了面包、肉和啤酒。歌手约莫十八岁，他大胆地瞧着他们，问他们打哪儿来，往哪儿走，路上有些什么消息等等，连珠炮似的一串问题，叫人不及反应。“我们两个星期前从君临出发的。”凯特琳挑了最安全的问题回答。
“That’s where I’m bound,” the youth said. As she had suspected, he was more interested in telling his own story than in hearing theirs. Singers loved nothing half so well as the sound of their own voices. “The Hand’s tourney means rich lords with fat purses. The last time I came away with more silver than I could carry … or would have, if I hadn’t lost it all betting on the Kingslayer to win the day.”
“我正要去那儿呢。”年轻人道。果然不出她所料，他对说自己的事远比听他们的事感兴趣。歌手们最爱的莫过于炫耀自己的声音。“首相比武大会上财主老爷肯定多的是，上回我赚的钱多到搬不动……呃，只可惜我后来把注下在‘弑君者’身上，输了个精光。”
“The gods frown on the gambler,” Ser Rodrik said sternly. He was of the north, and shared the Stark views on tournaments.
“诸神在上，赌徒本该遭天谴。”罗德利克爵士口气严峻。身为北方人的他，和史塔克家一样对比武大会没好感。
“They frowned on me, for certain,” the singer said. “Your cruel gods and the Knight of Flowers altogether did me in.”
“我知道老天看我不顺眼，”歌手说，“所以你那些神和百花骑士联手把我坑惨了。”
“No doubt that was a lesson for you,” Ser Rodrik said.
“想必你学到教训了。”罗德利克爵士道。
“It was. This time my coin will champion Ser Loras.”
“可不是嘛。这回我要把注下在洛拉斯爵士身上。”
Ser Rodrik tried to tug at whiskers that were not there, but before he could frame a rebuke the serving boy came scurrying up. He laid trenchers of bread before them and filled them with chunks of browned meat off a skewer, dripping with hot juice. Another skewer held tiny onions, fire peppers, and fat mushrooms. Ser Rodrik set to lustily as the lad ran back to fetch them beer.
罗德利克爵士又想捻不存在的胡子，他还来不及回敬对方，跑堂小弟便急急赶了过来，在他们面前奉上一盘盘面包，又从叉子上切下烤成棕色，流着热汤汁的肉片。另一个叉子上则有小洋葱、红辣椒和肥美的蘑菇。罗德利克当下就狼吞虎咽起来，那侍者又跑去帮他们盛啤酒。
“My name is Marillion,” the singer said, plucking a string on his woodharp. “Doubtless you’ve heard me play somewhere?”
“我叫马瑞里安，”歌手边说边拨着一根琴弦，“想必你们在别的地方听过我表演？”
His manner made Catelyn smile. Few wandering singers ever ventured as far north as Winterfell, but she knew his like from her girlhood in Riverrun. “I fear not,” she told him.
听他这种口气，凯特琳不禁微笑。吟游诗人鲜少光临地处极北的临冬城，但她在奔流城的少女时代常见识这类人。“恐怕没有。”她告诉他。
He drew a plaintive chord from the woodharp. “That is your loss,” he said. “Who was the finest singer you’ve ever heard?”
他在琴上弹出一个哀伤的音符。“那是你的损失。”他说，“你听过最好的歌手是谁？”
“Alia of Braavos,” Ser Rodrik answered at once.
“布拉佛斯的阿利亚。”罗德利克爵士立刻应道。
“Oh, I’m much better than that old stick,” Marillion said. “If you have the silver for a song, I’ll gladly show you.”
“唉，我比那老骨头高明多啦。”马瑞里安说，“如果你肯花个银币，我很乐意证明给你看。”
“I might have a copper or two, but I’d sooner toss it down a well than pay for your howling,” Ser Rodrik groused. His opinion of singers was well known; music was a lovely thing for girls, but he could not comprehend why any healthy boy would fill his hand with a harp when he might have had a sword.
“我是有两个铜板，但我宁可把钱扔到井里也不想听你鬼叫。”罗德利克爵士没好气地说。他讨厌歌手是出了名的，他认为女孩子家学点音乐固然很好，但身体健康的男孩竟然不碰刀剑，反而拿个竖琴哼哼唱唱，实在太不像话。
“Your grandfather has a sour nature,” Marillion said to Catelyn. “I meant to do you honor. An homage to your beauty. In truth, I was made to sing for kings and high lords.”
“你爷爷讲话真酸，”马瑞里安对凯特琳说，“我本来是想歌颂你的美貌哪。说实话，我这嗓子生来就是要唱歌给国王和大老爷听的。”
“Oh, I can see that,” Catelyn said. “Lord Tully is fond of song, I hear. No doubt you’ve been to Riverrun.”
“噢，看得出来，”凯特琳道，“据说徒利家老爷爱听音乐，想必你一定到过奔流城吧？”
“A hundred times,” the singer said airily. “They keep a chamber for me, and the young lord is like a brother.”
“去过不知多少次了哪，”歌手轻飘飘地说，“他们还专门帮我备了一间客房，我和他家少爷熟得跟哥们儿一样。”
Catelyn smiled, wondering what Edmure would think of that. Another singer had once bedded a girl her brother fancied; he had hated the breed ever since. “And Winterfell?” she asked him. “Have you traveled north?”
凯特琳微笑，心想不知艾德慕听了会作何反应？她弟弟自从喜欢的女孩子被一个歌手给睡了之后，他对这个行业便痛恨至今。“那临冬城呢？”她又问，“你去过北方吗？”
“Why would I?” Marillion asked. “It’s all blizzards and bearskins up there, and the Starks know no music but the howling of wolves.” Distantly, she was aware of the door banging open at the far end of the room.
“我去那儿做什么？”马瑞里安反问，“那里冰雪满天飞，出个门都裹得厚厚的，而且史塔克家的人哪懂什么音乐？他们只爱听狼嚎罢了。”这时她隐约听见房间远端传来开门的声音。
“Innkeep,” a servant’s voice called out behind her, “we have horses that want stabling, and my lord of Lannister requires a room and a hot bath.”
“老板，”一个随从的声音从她身后传来，“找个人帮我们喂马，我们家兰尼斯特大人要房间和洗热水澡。”
“Oh, gods,” Ser Rodrik said before Catelyn reached out to silence him, her fingers tightening hard around his forearm.
“诸神在上。”罗德利克道，凯特琳急忙伸手制止他，她的手指紧紧攫住他的前臂。
Masha Heddle was bowing and smiling her hideous red smile. “I’m sorry, m’lord, truly, we’re full up, every room.”
玛莎·海德露出那招牌式的可怖的腥红微笑，忙着打躬作揖。“大人，真对不住，可咱们真的客满了。”
There were four of them, Catelyn saw. An old man in the black of the Night’s Watch, two servants … and him, standing there small and bold as life. “My men will sleep in your stable, and as for myself, well, I do not require a large room, as you can plainly see.” He flashed a mocking grin. “So long as the fire’s warm and the straw reasonably free of fleas, I am a happy man.”
凯特琳看到他们一行四人：一个穿着守夜人黑衫的老头，两个仆从……还有他，小个子好端端地站在那里。“我手下睡马厩就好，至于我嘛，你也看得出来，我不需要多大的房间。”他自我解嘲地嘻嘻一笑。“所以只要火够温暖，稻草里没太多跳蚤，我就很乐意啦。”
Masha Heddle was beside herself. “M’lord, there’s nothing, it’s the tourney, there’s no help for it, oh …”
玛莎·海德急得不知如何是好。“大人，我们真是没办法，都是这比武大会害的，人多得不像话，喔……”
Tyrion Lannister pulled a coin from his purse and flicked it up over his head, caught it, tossed it again. Even across the room, where Catelyn sat, the wink of gold was unmistakable.
提利昂·兰尼斯特从口袋里取出一枚钱币，上抛过头，接住，又弹一遍。即使坐在房间对面的凯特琳也看得见那是闪闪发亮的黄金。
A freerider in a faded blue cloak lurched to his feet. “You’re welcome to my room, m’lord.”
一名穿着褪色蓝斗篷的自由骑手摇晃着站起身。“大人，您若不嫌弃，就将就将就我的房间吧。”
“Now there’s a clever man,” Lannister said as he sent the coin spinning across the room. The freerider snatched it from the air. “And a nimble one to boot.” The dwarf turned back to Masha Heddle. “You will be able to manage food, I trust?”
“这家伙聪明，”兰尼斯特边说边把金币丢过来，自由骑手在空中伸手接住。“身手也不赖。”侏儒转身对玛莎·海德说，“吃的方面，我想应该没问题吧？”
“Anything you like, m’lord, anything at all,” the innkeep promised. And may he choke on it , Catelyn thought, but it was Bran she saw choking, drowning on his own blood.
“什么都行，大人，您要吃什么都行。”老板娘再三保证。吃到噎死最好，凯特琳心想，然而她眼前浮现的却是布兰浑身浴血，难以呼吸的景象。
Lannister glanced at the nearest tables. “My men will have whatever you’re serving these people. Double portions, we’ve had a long hard ride. I’ll take a roast fowl—chicken, duck, pigeon, it makes no matter. And send up a flagon of your best wine. Yoren, will you sup with me?”
兰尼斯特瞄了离他最近的餐桌一眼。“我手下跟这些人吃一样的东西就成，不过份量加倍，我们骑了好长一段路。帮我烤只鸟，鸡鸭鸽子都行。再来一壶你最好的葡萄酒。尤伦，你要跟我一起吃吗？”
“Aye, m’lord, I will,” the black brother replied.
“好啊，大人，就跟您一起吃吧。”黑衣弟兄回答。
The dwarf had not so much as glanced toward the far end of the room, and Catelyn was thinking how grateful she was for the crowded benches between them when suddenly Marillion bounded to his feet. “My lord of Lannister!” he called out. “I would be pleased to entertain you while you eat. Let me sing you the lay of your father’s great victory at King’s Landing!”
侏儒连看都没看房间这边一眼，凯特琳心里暗自庆幸，还好自己的位置与他们隔了这么多拥挤的餐桌和长凳。这时马瑞里安突然跳将起来。“兰尼斯特大人！”他叫道，“我可能荣幸地在您用餐时为您娱乐助兴？让我为您唱一首歌颂令尊大人君临大捷的歌罢！”
“Nothing would be more likely to ruin my supper,” the dwarf said dryly. His mismatched eyes considered the singer briefly, started to move away … and found Catelyn. He looked at her for a moment, puzzled. She turned her face away, but too late. The dwarf was smiling. “Lady Stark, what an unexpected pleasure,” he said. “I was sorry to miss you at Winterfell.”
“那我不反胃死才怪。”侏儒酸酸地说。他用大小不一的眼睛打量了歌手一眼，正准备挪开视线……却看到了凯特琳。他困惑地看了她半晌，她别过头，但为时已晚。侏儒露出微笑。“史塔克夫人，好个意外的惊喜。”他说，“很遗憾没能在临冬城见到您。”
Marillion gaped at her, confusion giving way to chagrin as Catelyn rose slowly to her feet. She heard Ser Rodrik curse. If only the man had lingered at the Wall, she thought, if only …
马瑞里安张大了嘴，看着她缓缓起身，表情从困惑转为懊恼。她听见罗德利克爵士咒骂。若是提利昂在长城多待几天就好了，若是……
“Lady … Stark?” Masha Heddle said thickly.
“史塔克……夫人？”玛莎·海德粗声道。
“I was still Catelyn Tully the last time I bedded here,” she told the innkeep. She could hear the muttering, feel the eyes upon her. Catelyn glanced around the room, at the faces of the knights and sworn swords, and took a deep breath to slow the frantic beating of her heart. Did she dare take the risk? There was no time to think it through, only the moment and the sound of her own voice ringing in her ears. “You in the corner,” she said to an older man she had not noticed until now. “Is that the black bat of Harrenhal I see embroidered on your surcoat, ser?”
“我上次在此投宿时，还是徒利家的凯特琳。”她告诉老板娘。她听见人群低声议论，感觉到众人的眼光集中在自己身上。凯特琳环顾房间，看着众位骑士和誓言骑士，然后深吸一口气，缓和狂乱的心跳。她真要冒险吗？没有时间仔细思量，机会转瞬即逝。她只听见自己的声音在耳际回荡。“坐在角落那位先生，”她先前没注意到这位年纪较长的人。“您外衣上绣的可是赫伦堡的黑蝙蝠？”
The man got to his feet. “It is, my lady.”
那人连忙起身答道：“是的，夫人。”
“And is Lady Whent a true and honest friend to my father, Lord Hoster Tully of Riverrun?”
“家父是奔流城的霍斯特·徒利，敢问河安夫人是不是他忠实的盟友？”
“She is,” the man replied stoutly.
“她当然是。”那人坚定地回答。
Ser Rodrik rose quietly and loosened his sword in its scabbard. The dwarf was blinking at them, blank-faced, with puzzlement in his mismatched eyes.
罗德利克爵士静静地站起来，抽出鞘里的剑。侏儒眨着眼睛，一脸茫然，两只大小不一的眼睛里闪着迷惑。
“The red stallion was ever a welcome sight in Riverrun,” she said to the trio by the fire. “My father counts Jonos Bracken among his oldest and most loyal bannermen.”
“红色骏马纹章向来受奔流城欢迎礼遇，”她对火炉边的三人说，“家父将裘诺斯·布雷肯伯爵视为追随他最久也最忠心耿耿的封臣。”
The three men-at-arms exchanged uncertain looks. “Our lord is honored by his trust,” one of them said hesitantly.
三位士兵交换着不太确定的眼神。“我们家大人感激令尊的信任。”
“I envy your father all these fine friends,” Lannister quipped, “but I do not quite see the purpose of this, Lady Stark.”
“我羡慕令尊有这么多好朋友，”兰尼斯特讥讽地说，“但史塔克夫人，我不明白您这么做有何目的。”
She ignored him, turning to the large party in blue and grey. They were the heart of the matter; there were more than twenty of them. “I know your sigil as well: the twin towers of Frey. How fares your good lord, sers?”
她没理会他，径自转向那群穿灰蓝衣服的人。这二十多个人才是关键所在。“佛雷家的双塔标志我也很熟悉，诸位爵士先生，不知你们家主人近来可好？”
Their captain rose. “Lord Walder is well, my lady. He plans to take a new wife on his ninetieth name day, and has asked your lord father to honor the wedding with his presence.”
他们的领队站起来。“夫人，瓦德大人他很好。他打算在九十岁命名日那天迎娶新夫人，希望有幸可以请到令尊大人到场增光。”
Tyrion Lannister sniggered. That was when Catelyn knew he was hers. “This man came a guest into my house, and there conspired to murder my son, a boy of seven,” she proclaimed to the room at large, pointing. Ser Rodrik moved to her side, his sword in hand. “In the name of King Robert and the good lords you serve, I call upon you to seize him and help me return him to Winterfell to await the king’s justice.”
提利昂·兰尼斯特听了不禁偷笑，然而这时凯特琳已然确定他逃不掉了。“此人以客人的身份来到我家，意图谋害我七岁的儿子。”她指给全场的人看。罗德利克爵士提着剑走到她身边。“以劳勃国王和诸位侍奉的贵族大人之名，我请求你们将他绳之以法，并协助我将他送至临冬城，听候国王律法发落。”
She did not know what was more satisfying: the sound of a dozen swords drawn as one or the look on Tyrion Lannister’s face.
一时之间，凯特琳不知道究竟是十数支长剑齐声出鞘的声音比较悦耳，还是当下提利昂·兰尼斯特脸上的表情更教人痛快？！
*SANSA
第三十章 珊莎
S ansa rode to the Hand’s tourney with Septa Mordane and Jeyne Poole, in a litter with curtains of yellow silk so fine she could see right through them. They turned the whole world gold. Beyond the city walls, a hundred pavilions had been raised beside the river, and the common folk came out in the thousands to watch the games. The splendor of it all took Sansa’s breath away; the shining armor, the great chargers caparisoned in silver and gold, the shouts of the crowd, the banners snapping in the wind … and the knights themselves, the knights most of all.
珊莎与茉丹修女和珍妮·普尔乘着轿子前往首相的比武大会。轿子的帘幕是用黄丝织成，做工极为精细，她可以直接透过帘幕，看到远方，而帘幕把外面的世界染成了一片金黄。城墙外，河岸边，百余座帐篷已然搭起，数以千计的平民百姓前来观赏。比武大会的壮观教珊莎看得喘不过气：闪亮的铠甲，披金挂银的高大战马，群众的高声吆喝，风中飘荡的鲜明旗帜……还有那些骑士，尤其是那些骑士。
“It is better than the songs,” she whispered when they found the places that her father had promised her, among the high lords and ladies. Sansa was dressed beautifully that day, in a green gown that brought out the auburn of her hair, and she knew they were looking at her and smiling.
“这比歌谣里唱的还棒。”当她们在列席的领主和贵妇们中间找到父亲安排的座位时，她不禁轻声说。这天珊莎穿了一件绿色礼服，正好衬出她棕红色的头发，漂亮极了。她自知众人看着她的眼神里漾满笑意。
They watched the heroes of a hundred songs ride forth, each more fabulous than the last. The seven knights of the Kingsguard took the field, all but Jaime Lannister in scaled armor the color of milk, their cloaks as white as fresh-fallen snow. Ser Jaime wore the white cloak as well, but beneath it he was shining gold from head to foot, with a lion’s-head helm and a golden sword. Ser Gregor Clegane, the Mountain That Rides, thundered past them like an avalanche. Sansa remembered Lord Yohn Royce, who had guested at Winterfell two years before. “His armor is bronze, thousands and thousands of years old, engraved with magic runes that ward him against harm,” she whispered to Jeyne. Septa Mordane pointed out Lord Jason Mallister, in indigo chased with silver, the wings of an eagle on his helm. He had cut down three of Rhaegar’s bannermen on the Trident. The girls giggled over the warrior priest Thoros of Myr, with his flapping red robes and shaven head, until the septa told them that he had once scaled the walls of Pyke with a flaming sword in hand.
她们看着千百条歌谣里描述的英雄跃然眼前，一个比一个英姿焕发。御林七铁卫是全场焦点，除了詹姆·兰尼斯特，他们全都身着牛奶色的鳞甲，披风洁白犹如初雪。詹姆爵士也穿了白披风，但他从头到脚金光闪闪，还有一顶狮头盔和黄金宝剑。外号“魔山”的格雷果·克里冈爵士以山崩之势轰隆隆地经过他们面前。珊莎还记得约恩·罗伊斯伯爵，他两年前到过临冬城作客。“他的铠甲是青铜做的，有好几千年的历史，上面刻了魔法符咒，保护他不受伤害。”她悄悄对珍妮说。茉丹修女在人群中指出一身蓝紫滚银边披风，头戴一顶鹰翼盔的杰森·梅利斯特伯爵给她们看。当年在三叉戟河上他一人就斩了雷加手下三名诸侯。女孩们看到密尔的战僧索罗斯是个大光头，一身宽松红袍在风中拍动不休，不禁咯咯直笑，直到修女告诉她们他曾手持冒火长剑，独自攻上派克城墙，她们方才止住。
Other riders Sansa did not know; hedge knights from the Fingers and Highgarden and the mountains of Dorne, unsung freeriders and new-made squires, the younger sons of high lords and the heirs of lesser houses. Younger men, most had done no great deeds as yet, but Sansa and Jeyne agreed that one day the Seven Kingdoms would resound to the sound of their names. Ser Balon Swann. Lord Bryce Caron of the Marches. Bronze Yohn’s heir, Ser Andar Royce, and his younger brother Ser Robar, their silvered steel plate filigreed in bronze with the same ancient runes that warded their father. The twins Ser Horas and Ser Hobber, whose shields displayed the grape cluster sigil of the Redwynes, burgundy on blue. Patrek Mallister, Lord Jason’s son. Six Freys of the Crossing: Ser Jared, Ser Hosteen, Ser Danwell, Ser Emmon, Ser Theo, Ser Perwyn, sons and grandsons of old Lord Walder Frey, and his bastard son Martyn Rivers as well.
除此而外，还有许多珊莎不认得的人，有从五指半岛、高庭和多恩领来的雇佣骑士，有歌谣里并未提及的自由骑手和新上任的侍从，也有出身世家但排行居末的贵族少爷，或是地方诸侯的继承人。这些年轻人多半尚未建立显赫功勋，但珊莎和珍妮相信有朝一日他们的名字定将传遍七大王国。他们中包括巴隆·史文爵士；边疆地的布莱斯·卡伦伯爵；青铜约恩的继承人安达·罗伊斯爵士和他的弟弟罗拔爵士，他们的铠甲外面镀银，刻着和父亲一样的青铜保护符咒；雷德温家的双胞胎兄弟霍拉斯爵士和霍柏爵士，他们盾牌上标志着蓝底酒红色的葡萄串纹章；派崔克·梅利斯特，杰森伯爵的儿子；来自河渡口的杰瑞爵士、霍斯丁爵士、丹威尔爵士、艾蒙爵士、席奥爵士、派温爵士等六个佛雷家代表，通通都是老侯爵瓦德·佛雷的儿孙，连他的私生子马丁·河文也来了。
Jeyne Poole confessed herself frightened by the look of Jalabhar Xho, an exile prince from the Summer Isles who wore a cape of green and scarlet feathers over skin as dark as night, but when she saw young Lord Beric Dondarrion, with his hair like red gold and his black shield slashed by lightning, she pronounced herself willing to marry him on the instant.
珍妮·普尔承认她被贾拉巴·梭尔给吓着了，他是个遭到放逐的王子，来自盛夏群岛，穿着红绿交织的羽毛披风，皮肤漆黑如夜。但当她看到一头红金头发，黑盾牌上画着闪电的贝里·唐德利恩伯爵时，又宣布自己当下就愿意嫁给他。
The Hound entered the lists as well, and so too the king’s brother, handsome Lord Renly of Storm’s End. Jory, Alyn, and Harwin rode for Winterfell and the north. “Jory looks a beggar among these others,” Septa Mordane sniffed when he appeared. Sansa could only agree. Jory’s armor was blue-grey plate without device or ornament, and a thin grey cloak hung from his shoulders like a soiled rag. Yet he acquitted himself well, unhorsing Horas Redwyne in his first joust and one of the Freys in his second. In his third match, he rode three passes at a freerider named Lothor Brune whose armor was as drab as his own. Neither man lost his seat, but Brune’s lance was steadier and his blows better placed, and the king gave him the victory. Alyn and Harwin fared less well; Harwin was unhorsed in his first tilt by Ser Meryn of the Kingsguard, while Alyn fell to Ser Balon Swann.
“猎狗”也在队列之中，还有国王的弟弟，英俊的风息堡公爵蓝礼。乔里、埃林和哈尔温是临冬城和北境的代表。“跟别人比起来，乔里就像个乞丐。”他出现时茉丹修女嗤之以鼻，而珊莎不得不同意这句评价。乔里穿着灰蓝色的盔甲，上面没有任何纹章或雕饰，肩头薄薄的灰披风活像件脏兮兮的破布。虽然如此，他依旧表现不俗，头一遭上场便将霍拉斯·雷德温刺下马，第二回合又打落一个佛雷家的骑士，第三次时他与一个盔甲和他同样单调，名叫罗索·布伦的流浪武士三番交手，双方都没能将对手刺落，但布伦持枪较稳，击中的地方也比较精准，所以国王宣告他胜利。埃林和哈尔温就没这么抢眼了，哈尔温第一次上场就被御林铁卫的马林爵士一枪挑下马，埃林则败在巴隆·史文爵士枪下。
The jousting went all day and into the dusk, the hooves of the great warhorses pounding down the lists until the field was a ragged wasteland of torn earth. A dozen times Jeyne and Sansa cried out in unison as riders crashed together, lances exploding into splinters while the commons screamed for their favorites. Jeyne covered her eyes whenever a man fell, like a frightened little girl, but Sansa was made of sterner stuff. A great lady knew how to behave at tournaments. Even Septa Mordane noted her composure and nodded in approval.
马上长枪比武进行了一整天，直到黄昏。战马蹄声轰隆，把比武场的土地践踏成一片破败不堪的荒原。有好几次，珍妮和珊莎眼见骑士相互冲撞，长枪迸裂粉碎，群众高声尖叫，都忍不住齐声为支持者呐喊。每当有人坠马，珍妮就像个受惊的小女孩般遮住眼睛，可珊莎认为自己胆子比较大，官家小姐就应该在比武大会上表现出应有的风范。连茉丹修女都注意到她仪态从容，因而点头称许。
The Kingslayer rode brilliantly. He overthrew Ser Andar Royce and the Marcher Lord Bryce Caron as easily as if he were riding at rings, and then took a hard-fought match from white-haired Barristan Selmy, who had won his first two tilts against men thirty and forty years his junior.
“弑君者”战绩辉煌，他如骑马表演般轻取安达·罗伊斯爵士和边疆地的布莱斯·卡伦伯爵，接着又与巴利斯坦·赛尔弥展开激战，巴利斯坦爵士前两回合均击败比自己年轻三四十岁的对手。
Sandor Clegane and his immense brother, Ser Gregor the Mountain, seemed unstoppable as well, riding down one foe after the next in ferocious style. The most terrifying moment of the day came during Ser Gregor’s second joust, when his lance rode up and struck a young knight from the Vale under the gorget with such force that it drove through his throat, killing him instantly. The youth fell not ten feet from where Sansa was seated. The point of Ser Gregor’s lance had snapped off in his neck, and his life’s blood flowed out in slow pulses, each weaker than the one before. His armor was shiny new; a bright streak of fire ran down his outstretched arm, as the steel caught the light. Then the sun went behind a cloud, and it was gone. His cloak was blue, the color of the sky on a clear summer’s day, trimmed with a border of crescent moons, but as his blood seeped into it, the cloth darkened and the moons turned red, one by one.
桑铎·克里冈和他巨人般的哥哥“魔山”格雷果爵士同样是无人能挡，他俩刚猛地击败一个又一个对手。当天最恐怖的事便发生在格雷果爵士第二次出场时，只见他的长枪上翘，正中一名来自艾林谷的年轻骑士护喉甲下，因为力道过猛，长枪直穿咽喉，对方当即毙命。年轻骑士摔在离珊莎座位不到十尺的地方，格雷果爵士的枪尖打断了他的脖子，鲜血随着越来越衰弱的脉搏向外汩汩流出。他的铠甲晶亮崭新，日光照射下，他向外伸张的双臂宛如两条窜动的火纹。直到后来云层遮住太阳，火焰才没了影子。他的披风是夏日晴空的天蓝，上面绣着道道新月，但鲜血渗透，披风颜色转暗，那上面的月亮也一个接一个变得血红。
Jeyne Poole wept so hysterically that Septa Mordane finally took her off to regain her composure, but Sansa sat with her hands folded in her lap, watching with a strange fascination. She had never seen a man die before. She ought to be crying too, she thought, but the tears would not come. Perhaps she had used up all her tears for Lady and Bran. It would be different if it had been Jory or Ser Rodrik or Father, she told herself. The young knight in the blue cloak was nothing to her, some stranger from the Vale of Arryn whose name she had forgotten as soon as she heard it. And now the world would forget his name too, Sansa realized; there would be no songs sung for him. That was sad.
珍妮·普尔歇斯底里地嚎啕大哭，茉丹修女不得已只好先把她带开，让她镇静下来。珊莎坐在原位，两手交叉，放在膝上，看得入魔似的。这是她头一遭目睹别人丧命。她心里觉得也该哭的，但眼泪就是掉不下来。或许她已经为淑女和布兰哭干了眼泪罢，她对自己说，若换成乔里或罗德利克爵士，或甚至父亲大人，就不会这样了。这名年轻的蓝袍骑士与她毫无关系，只不过是个来自艾林谷的陌生人，他的名字从她左耳进右耳出。现在全世界也将和她一样，永远地遗忘他的名字，珊莎突然明白，不会有人谱曲歌颂他了。多么令人伤感啊。
After they carried off the body, a boy with a spade ran onto the field and shoveled dirt over the spot where he had fallen, to cover up the blood. Then the jousts resumed.
随后他们抬走尸体，一个男孩带着铲子跑进场内，铲起泥土盖住他跌落的地方，遮掉血迹。比武又继续进行。
Ser Balon Swann also fell to Gregor, and Lord Renly to the Hound. Renly was unhorsed so violently that he seemed to fly backward off his charger, legs in the air. His head hit the ground with an audible crack that made the crowd gasp, but it was just the golden antler on his helm. One of the tines had snapped off beneath him. When Lord Renly climbed to his feet, the commons cheered wildly, for King Robert’s handsome young brother was a great favorite. He handed the broken tine to his conqueror with a gracious bow. The Hound snorted and tossed the broken antler into the crowd, where the commons began to punch and claw over the little bit of gold, until Lord Renly walked out among them and restored the peace. By then Septa Mordane had returned, alone. Jeyne had been feeling ill, she explained; she had helped her back to the castle. Sansa had almost forgotten about Jeyne.
接下来，巴隆·史文爵士也被格雷果打下马，蓝礼公爵则输给了猎狗。蓝礼被狠狠地击中，几乎是从战马上往后平飞。他的头落地时剧烈地铿了一声，全场观众听了倒抽一口冷气。还好遭殃的只是他头盔上的金鹿角，其中一根被他压断了。当蓝礼公爵爬起来时，全场疯狂地为他欢呼，只因劳勃国王的幼弟向来很受群众喜爱。他优雅地鞠个躬，将那根断掉的鹿角递给胜利者。猎狗哼了一声，把断角抛进观众席，老百姓立刻为了那点金子争得你死我活，直到最后蓝礼大人走进群众里安抚，方才恢复秩序。这时茉丹修女也回来了，却是独自一人。她解释说珍妮身体不适，已被护送回城堡休息。珊莎几乎都忘记珍妮了。
Later a hedge knight in a checkered cloak disgraced himself by killing Beric Dondarrion’s horse, and was declared forfeit. Lord Beric shifted his saddle to a new mount, only to be knocked right off it by Thoros of Myr. Ser Aron Santagar and Lothor Brune tilted thrice without result; Ser Aron fell afterward to Lord Jason Mallister, and Brune to Yohn Royce’s younger son, Robar.
稍后，一位穿格纹披风的雇佣骑士不小心杀了贝里·唐德利恩的坐骑，被判出局。贝里伯爵换了匹马，随即被密尔的索罗斯打了下来。艾伦·桑塔加爵士和罗索·布伦交手三次均难分轩轾，连国王也无法判定，艾伦爵士后来被杰森·梅利斯特伯爵击败，布伦则输给约恩·罗伊斯的年轻儿子罗拔。
In the end it came down to four; the Hound and his monstrous brother Gregor, Jaime Lannister the Kingslayer, and Ser Loras Tyrell, the youth they called the Knight of Flowers.
最后场内只剩下四人：“猎狗”和他的怪物哥哥格雷果，弑君者詹姆·兰尼斯特，以及有“百花骑士”之誉的少年洛拉斯·提利尔爵士。
Ser Loras was the youngest son of Mace Tyrell, the Lord of Highgarden and Warden of the South. At sixteen, he was the youngest rider on the field, yet he had unhorsed three knights of the Kingsguard that morning in his first three jousts. Sansa had never seen anyone so beautiful. His plate was intricately fashioned and enameled as a bouquet of a thousand different flowers, and his snow-white stallion was draped in a blanket of red and white roses. After each victory, Ser Loras would remove his helm and ride slowly round the fence, and finally pluck a single white rose from the blanket and toss it to some fair maiden in the crowd.
洛拉斯爵士是高庭公爵和南境守护梅斯·提利尔的小儿子，年方十六，是场上年纪最小的骑士，然而当天早上他三进三出，便击败了三个御林铁卫。珊莎从未见过如此俊美的人儿。他的铠甲经过精心雕琢，上面的瓷釉包含着千束不同的花朵，他的雪白坐骑则覆以红毛毯和白玫瑰。每次得胜，洛拉斯爵士便会摘下头盔，从红毯上取下一朵白玫瑰，抛给群众里的某位美丽姑娘。
His last match of the day was against the younger Royce. Ser Robar’s ancestral runes proved small protection as Ser Loras split his shield and drove him from his saddle to crash with an awful clangor in the dirt. Robar lay moaning as the victor made his circuit of the field. Finally they called for a litter and carried him off to his tent, dazed and unmoving. Sansa never saw it. Her eyes were only for Ser Loras. When the white horse stopped in front of her, she thought her heart would burst.
当天他最后一场决斗对上了罗伊斯兄弟里的弟弟。罗拔爵士的家传符咒似乎也抵挡不了洛拉斯爵士的英勇，百花骑士把他的盾牌刺成两半，将他打下马鞍，轰地一声惨摔在泥地上。罗拔躺在地上呻吟，胜利者则绕场接受欢呼。后来定是有人叫了担架，把头晕眼花、动弹不得的罗拔抬回营帐，然而珊莎根本没看到，她的视线全聚集在洛拉斯爵士身上。当他的白马停在她面前时，她只觉自己的心房都快要炸开。
To the other maidens he had given white roses, but the one he plucked for her was red. “Sweet lady,” he said, “no victory is half so beautiful as you.” Sansa took the flower timidly, struck dumb by his gallantry. His hair was a mass of lazy brown curls, his eyes like liquid gold. She inhaled the sweet fragrance of the rose and sat clutching it long after Ser Loras had ridden off.
他给了其他女孩白玫瑰，摘给她的却是朵红玫瑰。“亲爱的小姐，”他说，“再伟大的胜利也不及你一半美丽。”珊莎羞怯地接过花，整个人被他的英姿所震慑。他的头发是一丛慵懒的棕色鬈发，眼睛像是融化的黄金。她深吸玫瑰甜美的香气，直到洛拉斯爵士策马离开还紧握不放。
When Sansa finally looked up, a man was standing over her, staring. He was short, with a pointed beard and a silver streak in his hair, almost as old as her father. “You must be one of her daughters,” he said to her. He had grey-green eyes that did not smile when his mouth did. “You have the Tully look.”
当她再度抬头，却见一名男子正在她前面盯着她看。他个子很矮，一撮尖胡子，发际有几丝银白，年纪和父亲差不多。“你一定是她的女儿。”他对她说，嘴角虽然泛起笑意，那双灰绿色的眼睛却没有笑。“你有徒利家的容貌。”
“I’m Sansa Stark,” she said, ill at ease. The man wore a heavy cloak with a fur collar, fastened with a silver mockingbird, and he had the effortless manner of a high lord, but she did not know him. “I have not had the honor, my lord.”
“我是珊莎·史塔克，”她不安地说。那名男子穿着绒毛领口的厚重斗篷，用一只银色仿声鸟系住，他有着自然典雅的贵族气质，但她却不认得他。“大人，我还没有认识您的荣幸。”
Septa Mordane quickly took a hand. “Sweet child, this is Lord Petyr Baelish, of the king’s small council.”
茉丹修女连忙来解围。“好孩子，这是培提尔·贝里席伯爵，御前会议的重臣。”
“Your mother was my queen of beauty once,” the man said quietly. His breath smelled of mint. “You have her hair.” His fingers brushed against her cheek as he stroked one auburn lock. Quite abruptly he turned and walked away.
“令堂曾是我心目中爱与美的皇后。”男子轻声说。他的呼气有薄荷的味道。“你遗传了她的头发。”他伸手抚弄她的一撮红褐发束，指尖拂过她的脸颊。突然他转过身走开去了。
By then, the moon was well up and the crowd was tired, so the king decreed that the last three matches would be fought the next morning, before the melee. While the commons began their walk home, talking of the day’s jousts and the matches to come on the morrow, the court moved to the riverside to begin the feast. Six monstrous huge aurochs had been roasting for hours, turning slowly on wooden spits while kitchen boys basted them with butter and herbs until the meat crackled and spit. Tables and benches had been raised outside the pavilions, piled high with sweetgrass and strawberries and fresh-baked bread.
这时月亮早已升起，人们也累了，于是国王宣布最后三场比试将等到明天早上，在团体比武前举行。群众渐渐散去，一边讨论着当日的比武盛事和隔天的重头好戏，廷臣要员们则前往河边用餐。六头大得惊人的牦牛在烤肉铁叉上缓缓转动，已经烤了好几个小时，旁边的厨房小弟忙着涂抹奶油和草药，直到肉烤得香香酥酥，油脂四溢。帐篷外搭起大餐桌和长椅，桌上的甜菜、草莓和刚出炉的面包堆得老高。
Sansa and Septa Mordane were given places of high honor, to the left of the raised dais where the king himself sat beside his queen. When Prince Joffrey seated himself to her right, she felt her throat tighten. He had not spoken a word to her since the awful thing had happened, and she had not dared to speak to him. At first she thought she hated him for what they’d done to Lady, but after Sansa had wept her eyes dry, she told herself that it had not been Joffrey’s doing, not truly. The queen had done it; she was the one to hate, her and Arya. Nothing bad would have happened except for Arya.
珊莎和茉丹修女被安排在临时搭建的高台上的贵宾席，就在国王和王后的左边。当乔佛里王子在她右手坐下时，她直觉得喉咙发紧。自上次的事件后，他便一句话都没跟她说，她也不敢开口。起初因为他们杀了淑女，她以为自己恨他，然而等珊莎眼泪流干，她又告诉自己真正的错不在乔佛里，而在王后，王后才是她该怨的人，王后和艾莉亚。如果不是艾莉亚，就什么事都不会发生了。
She could not hate Joffrey tonight. He was too beautiful to hate. He wore a deep blue doublet studded with a double row of golden lion’s heads, and around his brow a slim coronet made of gold and sapphires. His hair was as bright as the metal. Sansa looked at him and trembled, afraid that he might ignore her or, worse, turn hateful again and send her weeping from the table.
今晚她实在没办法去恨乔佛里，因为他委实太过俊美。他穿了一件深蓝的紧身上衣，上绣两排金色狮头，额间戴了一顶用黄金和蓝宝石做成的纤细冠冕。他的头发如真金一般闪亮。珊莎看着她，不禁浑身颤抖，生怕他会不理她，甚至又对她恶声恶气，让她哭着跑开。
Instead Joffrey smiled and kissed her hand, handsome and gallant as any prince in the songs, and said, “Ser Loras has a keen eye for beauty, sweet lady.”
结果乔佛里不仅面带微笑，还吻了她的手，跟歌谣里的王子一样英气勃发。他对她说：“亲爱的小姐，洛拉斯爵士眼光很好，知道谁才是真正的美人。”
“He was too kind,” she demurred, trying to remain modest and calm, though her heart was singing. “Ser Loras is a true knight. Do you think he will win tomorrow, my lord?”
“他对我太好了。”她装出严肃的样子，想要表现得礼貌而冷静，然而她的心却在歌唱。“洛拉斯爵士是位真正的骑士。大人，您觉得他明天可会获胜？”
“No,” Joffrey said. “My dog will do for him, or perhaps my uncle Jaime. And in a few years, when I am old enough to enter the lists, I shall do for them all.” He raised his hand to summon a servant with a flagon of iced summerwine, and poured her a cup. She looked anxiously at Septa Mordane, until Joffrey leaned over and filled the septa’s cup as well, so she nodded and thanked him graciously and said not another word.
“不会。”乔佛里道，“我的狗会收拾他，不然我舅舅詹姆也会。再过几年，等我可以进场，我会把他们全收拾掉。”他举起手，召仆人送来一瓶冰镇的夏日红，亲自为她斟上一杯。她不安地看看茉丹修女，直等到乔佛里靠过去把修女的酒杯也倒满，她才优雅地点头称谢，然后再没说话。
The servants kept the cups filled all night, yet afterward Sansa could not recall ever tasting the wine. She needed no wine. She was drunk on the magic of the night, giddy with glamour, swept away by beauties she had dreamt of all her life and never dared hope to know. Singers sat before the king’s pavilion, filling the dusk with music. A juggler kept a cascade of burning clubs spinning through the air. The king’s own fool, the pie-faced simpleton called Moon Boy, danced about on stilts, all in motley, making mock of everyone with such deft cruelty that Sansa wondered if he was simple after all. Even Septa Mordane was helpless before him; when he sang his little song about the High Septon, she laughed so hard she spilled wine on herself.
侍者不停斟酒，杯子从未干涸，但事后珊莎却不记得自己尝过酒。她无需喝酒，便已陶醉在今夜的魔力下，被种种迷人事物薰得头晕目眩，被她梦想了一辈子、却从来不敢奢望目睹的美丽给弄得意乱情迷。吟游歌手们坐在国王的营帐前，让乐音流转于暮色之中。一名杂耍艺人在空中抛掷着一根根燃烧的木棍。头脑简单的扁脸“月童”——国王的御用小丑——穿着五颜六色的衣服，踩着高跷跳舞，并嘲弄在场的每一个人，其机巧毒舌，教珊莎不禁怀疑他怎么可能头脑简单。连茉丹修女在他面前也没了矜持，当他唱起寻大主教开心的小调时，她笑得把酒洒了一身。
And Joffrey was the soul of courtesy. He talked to Sansa all night, showering her with compliments, making her laugh, sharing little bits of court gossip, explaining Moon Boy’s japes. Sansa was so captivated that she quite forgot all her courtesies and ignored Septa Mordane, seated to her left.
至于乔佛里，更是集所有礼数于一身。他整晚陪珊莎聊天，赞美之词一句接一句，逗她笑个不停，此外他还和她分享宫廷里的琐碎闲话，向她解释月童的笑话等等。珊莎只觉得心中犹如小鹿乱撞，便把自己所有的礼仪，外加坐在她左边的茉丹修女都忘得一干二净。
All the while the courses came and went. A thick soup of barley and venison. Salads of sweetgrass and spinach and plums, sprinkled with crushed nuts. Snails in honey and garlic. Sansa had never eaten snails before; Joffrey showed her how to get the snail out of the shell, and fed her the first sweet morsel himself. Then came trout fresh from the river, baked in clay; her prince helped her crack open the hard casing to expose the flaky white flesh within. And when the meat course was brought out, he served her himself, slicing a queen’s portion from the joint, smiling as he laid it on her plate. She could see from the way he moved that his right arm was still troubling him, yet he uttered not a word of complaint.
与此同时，菜肴一道道送上端下，有浓稠的大麦鹿肉汤、洒上坚果碎片的凉拌甜菜、菠菜和李子沙拉，还有蜂蜜大蒜煮蜗牛。珊莎没吃过蜗牛，乔佛里便教她如何从蜗牛壳里挖出肉，并且亲自喂她吃了甜美的第一口。接着是刚从河中捕来、封在黏土里的烤鳟鱼。她的王子帮她撬开覆盖在外的坚硬泥土，露出里面的白嫩鱼片。等肉食端上之后，他还亲自为她服务，从王后才配享有的部位切下一块，笑眯眯地放进她的餐盘。从他动作的方式她看得出他的右手仍旧困扰着他，但他没有半句怨言。
Later came sweetbreads and pigeon pie and baked apples fragrant with cinnamon and lemon cakes frosted in sugar, but by then Sansa was so stuffed that she could not manage more than two little lemon cakes, as much as she loved them. She was wondering whether she might attempt a third when the king began to shout.
之后又上了甜面包、鸽肉馅饼、散发肉桂香气的烤苹果、洒满糖霜的柠檬蛋糕，可珊莎已经吃得太饱，勉强撑下两个小柠檬蛋糕后就再也吃不下了。正当她考虑有没有办法再吃第三个时，国王咆哮了起来。
King Robert had grown louder with each course. From time to time Sansa could hear him laughing or roaring a command over the music and the clangor of plates and cutlery, but they were too far away for her to make out his words.
劳勃国王的声音随着每道菜的端上越来越大。珊莎不时能听见他放声大笑或以盖过音乐和餐具碰撞声的音量发号施令，但他们距他太远，听不出他说些什么。
Now everybody heard him. “No ,” he thundered in a voice that drowned out all other speech. Sansa was shocked to see the king on his feet, red of face, reeling. He had a goblet of wine in one hand, and he was drunk as a man could be. “You do not tell me what to do, woman,” he screamed at Queen Cersei. “I am king here, do you understand? I rule here, and if I say that I will fight tomorrow, I will fight!”
这下每个人都听清楚了。“给我闭嘴，”他声如洪钟地大喝，压过了在场所有人的话音。珊莎讶异地发现国王身形蹒跚，满脸通红地站了起来，一手拿着一只高脚杯，醉得无以复加。“臭女人，休想管我做这做那，”他朝瑟曦王后尖叫，“我才是这里的国王，你懂不懂？这里是老子当家，老子说明天要打，就是要打！”
Everyone was staring. Sansa saw Ser Barristan, and the king’s brother Renly, and the short man who had talked to her so oddly and touched her hair, but no one made a move to interfere. The queen’s face was a mask, so bloodless that it might have been sculpted from snow. She rose from the table, gathered her skirts around her, and stormed off in silence, servants trailing behind.
每个人都目瞪口呆。珊莎看到巴利斯坦爵士，国王的弟弟蓝礼，还有稍早神态古怪地跟她说过话，还伸手摸她头发的矮个男子，然而没有人出面干涉。王后的脸全无血色，像副白雪雕成的面具。她从桌边站起，拉着裙子，一言不发地扭头便走，仆从们急忙跟过去。
Jaime Lannister put a hand on the king’s shoulder, but the king shoved him away hard. Lannister stumbled and fell. The king guffawed. “The great knight. I can still knock you in the dirt. Remember that, Kingslayer.” He slapped his chest with the jeweled goblet, splashing wine all over his satin tunic. “Give me my hammer and not a man in the realm can stand before me!”
詹姆·兰尼斯特伸手按住国王肩膀，但国王猛地把他甩开。兰尼斯特一个踉跄跌倒在地。国王狂笑道：“好个伟大的骑士！老子还是有办法叫你狗吃屎。记清楚啦，‘弑君者’。”他拿镶了珠宝的高脚杯敲敲胸膛，整件缎子外衣都洒上了葡萄酒。“只要我战锤在手，任谁也挡不住！”
Jaime Lannister rose and brushed himself off. “As you say, Your Grace.” His voice was stiff.
詹姆·兰尼斯特爬起来，拍拍尘土，“是的，国王陛下，”他口气僵硬地说。
Lord Renly came forward, smiling. “You’ve spilled your wine, Robert. Let me bring you a fresh goblet.”
蓝礼公爵笑盈盈地走上前。“劳勃，你把酒洒出来了，我帮你倒杯新的吧。”
Sansa started as Joffrey laid his hand on her arm. “It grows late,” the prince said. He had a queer look on his face, as if he were not seeing her at all. “Do you need an escort back to the castle?”
乔佛里伸手放在珊莎手臂上，把她吓了一跳。“时候不早了，”王子说。他的表情怪异，仿佛眼中看的根本不是她。“要不要送你回去？”
“No,” Sansa began. She looked for Septa Mordane, and was startled to find her with her head on the table, snoring soft and ladylike snores. “I mean to say … yes, thank you, that would be most kind. I am tired, and the way is so dark. I should be glad for some protection.”
“不用。”珊莎开口，她看看茉丹修女，结果惊讶地发现她趴在桌上，正以淑女的仪态轻声打鼾。“我的意思是说……好的，谢谢，你真是太周到了。我的确累了，路又很黑，有人保护再好不过。”
Joffrey called out, “Dog!”
乔佛里叫道：“狗来！”
Sandor Clegane seemed to take form out of the night, so quickly did he appear. He had exchanged his armor for a red woolen tunic with a leather dog’s head sewn on the front. The light of the torches made his burned face shine a dull red. “Yes, Your Grace?” he said.
桑铎·克里冈出现的速度之快，仿佛是黑夜的使者一般。他已经卸下铠甲，换上一件红色羊毛衫，胸前缝了一只皮狗头。火把的光芒把他灼伤的脸映得一片惨红。“王子殿下有何吩咐？”他说。
“Take my betrothed back to the castle, and see that no harm befalls her,” the prince told him brusquely. And without even a word of farewell, Joffrey strode off, leaving her there.
“带我未婚妻回城去，小心别让她受伤。”王子唐突地告诉他，然后连声再见也没说，便大踏步离去，把她留在原地。
Sansa could feel the Hound watching her. “Did you think Joff was going to take you himself?” He laughed. He had a laugh like the snarling of dogs in a pit. “Small chance of that.” He pulled her unresisting to her feet. “Come, you’re not the only one needs sleep. I’ve drunk too much, and I may need to kill my brother tomorrow.” He laughed again.
珊莎感觉得出猎狗正盯着她瞧。“你以为小乔会亲自送你回去？”他笑起来像是受困陷阱的狗在咆哮。“恐怕不太可能。”她毫无抵抗地任由他拉着站起。“走吧，不只你需要睡。我今晚也喝多了，明天还要打精神宰掉我老哥呢。”
Suddenly terrified, Sansa pushed at Septa Mordane’s shoulder, hoping to wake her, but she only snored the louder. King Robert had stumbled off and half the benches were suddenly empty. The feast was over, and the beautiful dream had ended with it.
珊莎突然一阵莫名惊恐，她推推茉丹修女的肩膀，想叫醒她，结果她的呼却打得更大声。劳勃国王跌跌撞撞不知走哪儿去了，长椅已然空了一半。晚宴已经结束，美丽的梦也随之烟消云散。
The Hound snatched up a torch to light their way. Sansa followed close beside him. The ground was rocky and uneven; the flickering light made it seem to shift and move beneath her. She kept her eyes lowered, watching where she placed her feet. They walked among the pavilions, each with its banner and its armor hung outside, the silence weighing heavier with every step. Sansa could not bear the sight of him, he frightened her so, yet she had been raised in all the ways of courtesy. A true lady would not notice his face, she told herself. “You rode gallantly today, Ser Sandor,” she made herself say.
猎狗抓起一只火把，权作照明，珊莎紧紧跟在他旁边。地面崎岖不平，岩石密布，被摇曳的火光一照，仿佛在她脚下晃动。她低垂视线，仔细看清，方才落脚。他们穿梭于营帐之间，每一间帐篷外都挂着不同的旗帜和盔甲。慢慢地，四周的宁静随着踏出的每一步而越显沉重。珊莎连看都不敢看他，他把她吓死了，只是她从小便被教导种种礼仪，而真正的淑女不会光注意他的脸的，她这么告诉自己。“桑铎爵士，您今天的表现英勇极了。”她勉强自己说。
Sandor Clegane snarled at her. “Spare me your empty little compliments, girl … and your ser’s . I am no knight. I spit on them and their vows. My brother is a knight. Did you see him ride today?”
桑铎·克里冈对她咆哮：“小妹妹，少拍我马屁……更不要开口爵士闭口爵士。我不是骑士，我瞧不起他们和他们的狗屁誓言。我老哥是骑士，你看他今天什么德行？”
“Yes,” Sansa whispered, trembling. “He was …”
“是的，”珊莎颤抖着小声说，“他很……”
“Gallant?” the Hound finished.
“很英勇？”猎狗替她说完。
He was mocking her, she realized. “No one could withstand him,” she managed at last, proud of herself. It was no lie.
她明白他在讽刺他。“没人挡得住他。”最后她说，颇感自豪，毕竟这不是谎话。
Sandor Clegane stopped suddenly in the middle of a dark and empty field. She had no choice but to stop beside him. “Some septa trained you well. You’re like one of those birds from the Summer Isles, aren’t you? A pretty little talking bird, repeating all the pretty little words they taught you to recite.”
桑铎·克里冈突然在一片黑暗空旷的平地中央停下脚步。她没办法，只好也跟着停下来。“我看这修女把你训练得不错。你跟那种盛夏群岛来的小鸟没差别，是不是？会说话的漂亮小小鸟，人家教你什么漂亮话你就照着念。”
“That’s unkind.” Sansa could feel her heart fluttering in her chest. “You’re frightening me. I want to go now.”
“这样说太不厚道了。”珊莎的心狂跳不休。“你吓到我了，我要走了。”
“No one could withstand him,” the Hound rasped. “That’s truth enough. No one could ever withstand Gregor. That boy today, his second joust, oh, that was a pretty bit of business. You saw that, did you? Fool boy, he had no business riding in this company. No money, no squire, no one to help him with that armor. That gorget wasn’t fastened proper. You think Gregor didn’t notice that? You think Ser Gregor’s lance rode up by chance, do you? Pretty little talking girl, you believe that, you’re empty-headed as a bird for true. Gregor’s lance goes where Gregor wants it to go. Look at me. Look at me!” Sandor Clegane put a huge hand under her chin and forced her face up. He squatted in front of her, and moved the torch close. “There’s a pretty for you. Take a good long stare. You know you want to. I’ve watched you turning away all the way down the kingsroad. Piss on that. Take your look.”
“没人挡得住他，”猎狗粗声道，“此话倒是不假。的确谁也挡不住格雷果。今天那小伙子，他第二次出场时的那个，喔，干得可真漂亮。你也看见了吧？那小呆瓜根本是自讨苦吃，没钱没跟班又没人帮他穿好盔甲。他的护喉根本就没绑好，你以为格雷果没注意到？你以为格雷果爵士先生的长枪是不小心往上扬，是吗？会说话的漂亮小小鸟，你要真这样相信，那你就跟小鸟一样没大脑了。格雷果的枪想刺哪里就刺哪里。看着我。你看着我！”桑铎·克里冈伸出巨掌捏住她下巴，硬是逼她往上看。他在她面前蹲下，把火把凑近来。“你爱看漂亮东西是吗？那就看看这张脸，好好给我看个够。我知道你想看得很。国王大道上你一路都故意躲着它，别假惺惺了，爱看就看。”
His fingers held her jaw as hard as an iron trap. His eyes watched hers. Drunken eyes, sullen with anger. She had to look.
他的手指像铁兽夹一样用力钳住她下巴。他们四目相对，他那双满是醉意的眼里闪着怒火。她不得不看。
The right side of his face was gaunt, with sharp cheekbones and a grey eye beneath a heavy brow. His nose was large and hooked, his hair thin, dark. He wore it long and brushed it sideways, because no hair grew on the other side of that face.
他右半边脸形容憔悴，有着锐利颧骨和浓眉灰眼。他有个鹰钩大鼻，头发色深而纤细。他故意把头发留长，梳到一边，因为他另半边脸半根头发也没有。
The left side of his face was a ruin. His ear had been burned away; there was nothing left but a hole. His eye was still good, but all around it was a twisted mass of scar, slick black flesh hard as leather, pocked with craters and fissured by deep cracks that gleamed red and wet when he moved. Down by his jaw, you could see a hint of bone where the flesh had been seared away.
他左半边脸烂成一团。耳朵整块烧蚀，只剩下一个洞。眼睛虽没瞎，但周围全是大块扭曲的疮疤，光滑的黑皮肤硬得跟皮革一样，其上布满了麻点和坑凹，以及一道道扯动就现出润红的裂缝。他下巴被烧焦的部分，则隐约可以见骨。
Sansa began to cry. He let go of her then, and snuffed out the torch in the dirt. “No pretty words for that, girl? No little compliment the septa taught you?” When there was no answer, he continued. “Most of them, they think it was some battle. A siege, a burning tower, an enemy with a torch. One fool asked if it was dragonsbreath.” His laugh was softer this time, but just as bitter. “I’ll tell you what it was, girl,” he said, a voice from the night, a shadow leaning so close now that she could smell the sour stench of wine on his breath. “I was younger than you, six, maybe seven. A woodcarver set up shop in the village under my father’s keep, and to buy favor he sent us gifts. The old man made marvelous toys. I don’t remember what I got, but it was Gregor’s gift I wanted. A wooden knight, all painted up, every joint pegged separate and fixed with strings, so you could make him fight. Gregor is five years older than me, the toy was nothing to him, he was already a squire, near six foot tall and muscled like an ox. So I took his knight, but there was no joy to it, I tell you. I was scared all the while, and true enough, he found me. There was a brazier in the room. Gregor never said a word, just picked me up under his arm and shoved the side of my face down in the burning coals and held me there while I screamed and screamed. You saw how strong he is. Even then, it took three grown men to drag him off me. The septons preach about the seven hells. What do they know? Only a man who’s been burned knows what hell is truly like.
珊莎哭了起来。这时他才放开她，然后在泥地上按熄火把。“没漂亮话说啦，小妹妹？修女没教你怎么赞美啊？”眼看她不回答，他又继续，“大多数人以为这是打仗来的，围城战，燃烧的攻城塔，或是拿火把的敌人所留下，还有个白痴问我是不是被龙息喷到。”这回他的笑比较缓和，却苦涩依然。“小妹妹，让我告诉你这伤是怎么来的吧。”他的声音从黑夜中传来，巨大的暗影离她如此之近，她甚至能闻到他呼吸中的酒臭。“当时我年纪比你还小，大概才六七岁，有个木雕师傅在我家城堡外的村落里开了家店，为讨好我爸，他送了点礼物给我们。这老头做玩具的功夫一流。我不记得自己收到了什么，但我想要的是格雷果的礼物。那是个木雕骑士，颜色涂得漂漂亮亮，每个关节都分开来，钉了钉子绑了线，你可以操纵他打架。格雷果大我五岁，当时已经当上了侍从，身高接近六尺，壮得像头牛，早就不玩玩具了。于是我把骑士据为己有，但我告诉你，偷来之后我一点都不快乐，我只是怕得要命。没过多久，果真被他发现。房间里刚好有个火盆，格雷果二话不说把我拎起来，将我半边脸就往炭堆里按，他就这样紧紧按住，任由我惨叫不停。你也看到他有多壮，即使在当时，最后还得靠三个成年人才有办法把他拉开。教士们成天说教七层地狱是如何可怕，他们懂个屁？只有被烧过的人才知道地狱是什么模样。”
“My father told everyone my bedding had caught fire, and our maester gave me ointments. Ointments! Gregor got his ointments too. Four years later, they anointed him with the seven oils and he recited his knightly vows and Rhaegar Targaryen tapped him on the shoulder and said, ‘Arise, Ser Gregor.’”
“我爸对别人说是我床单着了火，然后我们家师傅给我抹了油膏。油膏！格雷果也抹了油膏。四年之后他们为他涂抹七神圣油，他跟着背诵了骑士的誓词，雷加·坦格利安便拿剑拍拍他肩膀说‘起来吧，格雷果爵士。’”
The rasping voice trailed off. He squatted silently before her, a hulking black shape shrouded in the night, hidden from her eyes. Sansa could hear his ragged breathing. She was sad for him, she realized. Somehow, the fear had gone away.
黯哑的声音渐渐淡去。他静静地蹲坐她面前，如同暗夜中矗立的庞然巨物，而她什么也看不清。珊莎可以听见他急促的呼吸，突然发觉自己正为他感到悲伤。最初的恐惧不知怎么，已经消失无踪。
The silence went on and on, so long that she began to grow afraid once more, but she was afraid for him now, not for herself. She found his massive shoulder with her hand. “He was no true knight,” she whispered to him.
沉默持续下去，到后来她又害怕起来，然而这次她不是为自己，而是为了他。她伸手找到他宽阔的肩膀。“他不是真正的骑士。”她悄声对他说。
The Hound threw back his head and roared. Sansa stumbled back, away from him, but he caught her arm. “No,” he growled at her, “no, little bird, he was no true knight.”
“猎狗”仰头狂啸，珊莎踉跄后退想要逃开，但他一把抓住她的手。“不是，”他对她咆哮，“不是，小小鸟，他不是真正的骑士。”
The rest of the way into the city, Sandor Clegane said not a word. He led her to where the carts were waiting, told a driver to take them back to the Red Keep, and climbed in after her. They rode in silence through the King’s Gate and up torchlit city streets. He opened the postern door and led her into the castle, his burned face twitching and his eyes brooding, and he was one step behind her as they climbed the tower stairs. He took her safe all the way to the corridor outside her bedchamber.
回城途中，桑铎·克里冈没有再说半句话。他领她走到马车等候的地方，吩咐车夫把他们载回红堡，跟在她后面爬上车。他们在一片寂静中穿过国王大门，走上灯火通明的市镇街道。他打开边门，领她走进城堡，他烧伤的脸微微抽搐，眼里思绪满溢。攀登高塔楼梯时，他跟在她身后，仅隔一步之遥。他带她安然抵达寝室外面的走廊。
“Thank you, my lord,” Sansa said meekly.
“大人，谢谢你。”珊莎温顺地说。
The Hound caught her by the arm and leaned close. “The things I told you tonight,” he said, his voice sounding even rougher than usual. “If you ever tell Joffrey … your sister, your father … any of them …”
“猎狗”抓住她的手，靠了过来。“我今晚跟你说的事，”他的声音比平常还要粗哑。“你要是敢告诉乔佛里……或是你妹妹，你老爸……你要是敢跟任何人讲……”
“I won’t,” Sansa whispered. “I promise.”
“我不会说出去的。”珊莎悄声说，“我保证。”
It was not enough. “If you ever tell anyone,” he finished, “I’ll kill you.”
显然这还不够。“你要是敢跟任何人讲的话，”他把话说完，“我就杀了你。”
*EDDARD
第三十一章 艾德
“I stood last vigil for him myself,” Ser Barristan Selmy said as they looked down at the body in the back of the cart. “He had no one else. A mother in the Vale, I am told.”
“昨晚是我亲自替他守的灵，”巴利斯坦·赛尔弥爵士道，他们看着推车后面载着的遗体。“这孩子无依无靠，连个亲朋好友都没有，听说就只有艾林谷家里的母亲。”
In the pale dawn light, the young knight looked as though he were sleeping. He had not been handsome, but death had smoothed his rough-hewn features and the silent sisters had dressed him in his best velvet tunic, with a high collar to cover the ruin the lance had made of his throat. Eddard Stark looked at his face, and wondered if it had been for his sake that the boy had died. Slain by a Lannister bannerman before Ned could speak to him; could that be mere happenstance? He supposed he would never know.
苍白的晨光中，年轻骑士看上去仿佛正在沉睡。他算不上英俊，但死亡抚平了他粗糙的面容，静默修女会的姐妹则为他穿上了料子最好的天鹅绒外衣，高高的领口恰好遮住喉咙上被长枪戳出的大洞。艾德·史塔克看着他的脸，暗忖这男孩不知是否因为自己而丢了性命。奈德还不及和他谈谈，他便死于兰尼斯特封臣枪下。这真的只是巧合？他大概永远不会知道。
“Hugh was Jon Arryn’s squire for four years,” Selmy went on. “The king knighted him before he rode north, in Jon’s memory. The lad wanted it desperately, yet I fear he was not ready.”
“修夫在琼恩·艾林身边当了四年的侍从，”赛尔弥继续说，“国王为了纪念琼恩，在北行前封他做了骑士。这孩子想当骑士想得不行，只可惜他恐怕还没准备好。”
Ned had slept badly last night and he felt tired beyond his years. “None of us is ever ready,” he said.
奈德昨晚睡得很差，现在的他和身边的老人一样疲累。“我们不也一样？”他说。
“For knighthood?”
“我们也没准备好当骑士？”
“For death.” Gently Ned covered the boy with his cloak, a bloodstained bit of blue bordered in crescent moons. When his mother asked why her son was dead, he reflected bitterly, they would tell her he had fought to honor the King’s Hand, Eddard Stark. “This was needless. War should not be a game.” Ned turned to the woman beside the cart, shrouded in grey, face hidden but for her eyes. The silent sisters prepared men for the grave, and it was ill fortune to look on the face of death. “Send his armor home to the Vale. The mother will want to have it.”
“没准备好面对死亡”。奈德轻轻地为那孩子盖上他绣着弯月的染血蓝披风。当他的母亲问起儿子死因时，他苦涩地想，他们会说他是为了首相的荣誉而献身。“他根本不该送命。战争岂是儿戏？”奈德转身面对站在推车边的灰衣女人，她全身上下包裹得严严实实，脸上只露出眼睛。静默姐妹专门处理死者后事，而见着死亡的面容是不吉利的事。“把他的盔甲也送回艾林谷家里去，让母亲留作纪念吧。”
“It is worth a fair piece of silver,” Ser Barristan said. “The boy had it forged special for the tourney. Plain work, but good. I do not know if he had finished paying the smith.”
“这东西值不少钱，”巴利斯坦爵士道，“这孩子是特别为了比武会订做的。不花俏，但实在，不知道他付清铁匠的钱没有。”
“He paid yesterday, my lord, and he paid dearly,” Ned replied. And to the silent sister he said, “Send the mother the armor. I will deal with this smith.” She bowed her head.
“他昨天已经付出惨痛的代价了。”奈德回答，接着他对静默姐妹说，“把盔甲送给他母亲。铁匠这边我会处理。”她点点头。
Afterward Ser Barristan walked with Ned to the king’s pavilion. The camp was beginning to stir. Fat sausages sizzled and spit over firepits, spicing the air with the scents of garlic and pepper. Young squires hurried about on errands as their masters woke, yawning and stretching, to meet the day. A serving man with a goose under his arm bent his knee when he caught sight of them. “M’lords,” he muttered as the goose honked and pecked at his fingers. The shields displayed outside each tent heralded its occupant: the silver eagle of Seagard, Bryce Caron’s field of nightingales, a cluster of grapes for the Redwynes, brindled boar, red ox, burning tree, white ram, triple spiral, purple unicorn, dancing maiden, blackadder, twin towers, horned owl, and last the pure white blazons of the Kingsguard, shining like the dawn.
随后巴利斯坦爵士陪着奈德走向国王的帐篷。营地正在恢复生气，肥美的烤香肠在火堆上嘶嘶作响，滴着油汁，空气中充满蒜头和胡椒的香味。年轻侍从跑来跑去，而他们的主子刚刚睡醒，打着呵欠伸着懒腰，准备迎接新的一天。一个腋下夹了只鹅的厨子看见他们赶忙单膝跪下。“大人您们早。”他喃喃道，鹅嘎嘎叫着啄他手指。陈列在每个帐篷外的盾牌刻画着居住其中的贵族家徽，有海疆城的银色飞鹰，布莱斯·卡伦的夜莺与田野，雷德温家族的葡萄串，还有花斑野猪、红色公牛、燃烧之树、白色公羊、三重螺旋、紫色独角兽、跳舞少女、黑蛇、双塔、长角猫头鹰，最后是御林铁卫如黎明般闪亮的纯白纹章。
“The king means to fight in the melee today,” Ser Barristan said as they were passing Ser Meryn’s shield, its paint sullied by a deep gash where Loras Tyrell’s lance had scarred the wood as he drove him from his saddle.
“国王打算今天参加团体比武，”他们经过马林爵士的盾牌时，巴利斯坦说。盾牌上的漆被刮了深深的一划，正是昨天洛拉斯·提利尔将他刺下马时留的印记。
“Yes,” Ned said grimly. Jory had woken him last night to bring him that news. Small wonder he had slept so badly.
“是啊。”奈德表情凝重地说。乔里昨天夜里把他叫醒，向他通报了这个消息，难怪他睡不好。
Ser Barristan’s look was troubled. “They say night’s beauties fade at dawn, and the children of wine are oft disowned in the morning light.”
巴利斯坦爵士一脸愁容。“俗话说天亮后黑夜的美要消散，酒醒后说过的话就不算。”
“They say so,” Ned agreed, “but not of Robert.” Other men might reconsider words spoken in drunken bravado, but Robert Baratheon would remember and, remembering, would never back down.
“话是这么说，”奈德同意，“但对劳勃没用。”换做其他人，或许还会重新考虑酒后许下的豪言壮语，可劳勃·拜拉席恩会记得牢牢的，而且绝不反悔。
The king’s pavilion was close by the water, and the morning mists off the river had wreathed it in wisps of grey. It was all of golden silk, the largest and grandest structure in the camp. Outside the entrance, Robert’s warhammer was displayed beside an immense iron shield blazoned with the crowned stag of House Baratheon.
国王的营帐靠近水滨，包围在灰色的河面晨雾里。帐篷用金丝织成，乃是整个营地里最大也最华丽的建筑。劳勃的战锤和一面巨大的铁盾放在入口外，盾牌上纹饰着拜拉席恩家族的宝冠雄鹿。
Ned had hoped to discover the king still abed in a wine-soaked sleep, but luck was not with him. They found Robert drinking beer from a polished horn and roaring his displeasure at two young squires who were trying to buckle him into his armor. “Your Grace,” one was saying, almost in tears, “it’s made too small, it won’t go.” He fumbled, and the gorget he was trying to fit around Robert’s thick neck tumbled to the ground.
奈德原本希望国王宿醉未醒，一切便迎刃而解，可惜他们运气不好，正碰上用光滑角制酒杯喝啤酒的劳勃，他还一边对两个手忙脚乱替他穿铠甲的年轻侍从大呼小叫。“国王陛下，”其中一个眼泪都快掉下来了。“这铠甲太小，穿不上的。”他手一滑，原本正试着要套进劳勃粗脖子的颈甲便摔到地上。
“Seven hells!” Robert swore. “Do I have to do it myself? Piss on the both of you. Pick it up. Don’t just stand there gaping, Lancel, pick it up!” The lad jumped, and the king noticed his company. “Look at these oafs, Ned. My wife insisted I take these two to squire for me, and they’re worse than useless. Can’t even put a man’s armor on him properly. Squires, they say. I say they’re swineherds dressed up in silk.”
“七层地狱啊！”劳勃咒骂，“难道我非得亲自动手不可？你两个都是他妈的饭桶。把东西捡起来，不要光张着嘴呆在那儿。蓝赛尔，快给我捡起来！”那小伙子吓得跳将起来，国王这才注意到新来的访客。“奈德，快瞧瞧这些笨蛋。我老婆坚持要我收他们当侍从，结果他们比废物还不如。连帮人穿铠甲都不会，这算哪门子侍从，这叫穿了衣服的猪头。”
Ned only needed a glance to understand the difficulty. “The boys are not at fault,” he told the king. “You’re too fat for your armor, Robert.”
奈德只需一眼便看出问题所在。“这不是他们的错，”他告诉国王，“劳勃，是你太胖了，这才穿不下。”
Robert Baratheon took a long swallow of beer, tossed the empty horn onto his sleeping furs, wiped his mouth with the back of his hand, and said darkly, “Fat? Fat , is it? Is that how you speak to your king?” He let go his laughter, sudden as a storm. “Ah, damn you, Ned, why are you always right?”
劳勃·拜拉席恩灌了一大口啤酒，把空角杯扔到兽皮睡铺上，用手背抹抹嘴，然后阴阴地说：“太胖？太胖，是吗？你对国王是这样讲话的吗？”突然他像暴风来袭一样哈哈大笑。“啊，去你的，奈德，为什么你说的永远都没错？”
The squires smiled nervously until the king turned on them. “You. Yes, both of you. You heard the Hand. The king is too fat for his armor. Go find Ser Aron Santagar. Tell him I need the breastplate stretcher. Now! What are you waiting for?”
两个侍从露出紧张的微笑，国王又转向他们。“你们，对，你们两个，听见首相说的话了吗？国王太胖了，所以穿不下铠甲。去把艾伦·桑塔加爵士找来，跟他说我需要撑开胸甲的钳子。快去啊！还等什么？”
The boys tripped over each other in their haste to be quit of the tent. Robert managed to keep a stern face until they were gone. Then he dropped back into a chair, shaking with laughter.
男孩们慌忙跑出帐篷，途中还互相绊了一跤。劳勃装出一副严峻的表情直到他们离开，然后轰地坐回椅子，大笑不已。
Ser Barristan Selmy chuckled with him. Even Eddard Stark managed a smile. Always, though, the graver thoughts crept in. He could not help taking note of the two squires: handsome boys, fair and well made. One was Sansa’s age, with long golden curls; the other perhaps fifteen, sandy-haired, with a wisp of a mustache and the emerald-green eyes of the queen.
巴利斯坦·赛尔弥爵士跟着呵呵笑了，就连艾德·史塔克也露出了微笑。然而，他没法不在意那两个侍僮：他们都是漂亮小伙子，皮肤白晰，体态匀称。生着金色卷发的那个年纪和珊莎差不多，另外那个约莫十五，黄棕色头发，一点小胡子，有着和王后一样的翡翠绿眸。
“Ah, I wish I could be there to see Santagar’s face,” Robert said. “I hope he’ll have the wit to send them to someone else. We ought to keep them running all day!”
“啊，我真想瞧瞧桑塔加听了脸上是什么表情”。劳勃道，“他如果有点脑子，就会支他们去找别人。我们就让他俩成天跑个没完！”
“Those boys,” Ned asked him. “Lannisters?”
“这两个小伙子，”奈德问他，“是兰尼斯特家的人？”
Robert nodded, wiping tears from his eyes. “Cousins. Sons of Lord Tywin’s brother. One of the dead ones. Or perhaps the live one, now that I come to think on it. I don’t recall. My wife comes from a very large family, Ned.”
劳勃点头，一边擦掉笑出的眼泪。“她的两个堂弟，泰温大人他老弟的儿子，那些个死掉的老弟，我想想，又好像是活着的那个，我不记得了。奈德，我老婆来自一个很大的家族。”
A very ambitious family , Ned thought. He had nothing against the squires, but it troubled him to see Robert surrounded by the queen’s kin, waking and sleeping. The Lannister appetite for offices and honors seemed to know no bounds. “The talk is you and the queen had angry words last night.”
也是一个野心勃勃的家族，奈德心想。他对这两个侍从本身并无意见，但看到劳勃身边日夜都是王后的亲戚，却不免担心。兰尼斯特家对权位和荣耀真是贪得无厌。“听说您昨晚和王后闹不愉快了？”
The mirth curdled on Robert’s face. “The woman tried to forbid me to fight in the melee. She’s sulking in the castle now, damn her. Your sister would never have shamed me like that.”
劳勃脸上的欢乐顿时结冻。“那死女人想阻止我参加今天的团体比武，这会儿她还窝在城堡里生闷气，气死算了。你妹妹绝不会这样羞辱我。”
“You never knew Lyanna as I did, Robert,” Ned told him. “You saw her beauty, but not the iron underneath. She would have told you that you have no business in the melee.”
“劳勃，你对莱安娜的了解没我深，”奈德告诉他，“你只见到她的美，却不知道她真正的硬脾气。倘若她还活着，她会告诉你，你和团体比武毫无瓜葛。”
“You too?” The king frowned. “You are a sour man, Stark. Too long in the north, all the juices have frozen inside you. Well, mine are still running.” He slapped his chest to prove it.
“怎么你也来这套？”国王皱眉，“史塔克，你这家伙真讨厌，我看你在北方待得太久，体内的血都冻成冰啦。告诉你，老子可还热血沸腾哩。”他拍拍胸脯以示证明。
“You are the king,” Ned reminded him.
“别忘了你是国王。”奈德提醒他。
“I sit on the damn iron seat when I must. Does that mean I don’t have the same hungers as other men? A bit of wine now and again, a girl squealing in bed, the feel of a horse between my legs? Seven hells, Ned, I want to hit someone.”
“我该坐的时候坐坐那张该死的铁椅子，难道就不能跟其他人一样有七情六欲吗？难道我不能没事喝点小酒，找个女孩乐一乐，享受骑马的快感吗？下七层地狱去，奈德，我不过是想打打人罢了。”
Ser Barristan Selmy spoke up. “Your Grace,” he said, “it is not seemly that the king should ride into the melee. It would not be a fair contest. Who would dare strike you?”
巴利斯坦·赛尔弥爵士开了口：“陛下，”他说，“国王加入团体比武并不恰当，因为这样一来，比赛就不公平了。试问谁敢对您动手呢？”
Robert seemed honestly taken aback. “Why, all of them, damn it. If they can. And the last man left standing …”
劳勃真是没料到这层。“唉，谁都行啊，他妈的。只要他们有那能耐。反正最后站着的……”
“… will be you,” Ned finished. He saw at once that Selmy had hit the mark. The dangers of the melee were only a savor to Robert, but this touched on his pride. “Ser Barristan is right. There’s not a man in the Seven Kingdoms who would dare risk your displeasure by hurting you.”
“一定会是您。”奈德接口。他立刻发现赛尔弥点到了关键。若是强调比武的危险，只会更刺激劳勃，而这样说来便事关他的自尊。“巴利斯坦爵士说得没错，七国上下绝没有人敢冒着惹您生气的危险对您动手。”
The king rose to his feet, his face flushed. “Are you telling me those prancing cravens will let me win?”
国王满脸通红，霍地站起，“你的意思是那些没用的胆小鬼会故意失手？”
“For a certainty,” Ned said, and Ser Barristan Selmy bowed his head in silent accord.
“可想而知。”奈德道。巴利斯坦·赛尔弥爵士静静地点头同意。
For a moment Robert was so angry he could not speak. He strode across the tent, whirled, strode back, his face dark and angry. He snatched up his breastplate from the ground and threw it at Barristan Selmy in a wordless fury. Selmy dodged. “Get out,” the king said then, coldly. “Get out before I kill you.”
有好一阵子，劳勃气得说不出话。他从帐篷的这边走到那边，旋身，又走回来，一脸阴沉的怒气。随即他从地上抓起胸甲，气冲冲地朝巴利斯坦掷去。赛尔弥躲开了。“出去，”这时国王才冷冷地发话，“免得我宰了你。”
Ser Barristan left quickly. Ned was about to follow when the king called out again. “Not you, Ned.”
巴利斯坦爵士立刻离开，奈德正准备跟进，国王却又叫道：“奈德，你不用走。”
Ned turned back. Robert took up his horn again, filled it with beer from a barrel in the corner, and thrust it at Ned. “Drink,” he said brusquely.
奈德转身，只见劳勃再度拿起他的角杯，从角落里的酒桶装满啤酒，然后塞给奈德。“喝吧。”他唐突地说。
“I’ve no thirst—”
“我不渴——”
“Drink . Your king commands it.”
“快喝。这是国王的命令。”
Ned took the horn and drank. The beer was black and thick, so strong it stung the eyes.
于是奈德接过角杯喝了下去，啤酒又黑又浓，浓烈得令眼睛刺痛。
Robert sat down again. “Damn you, Ned Stark. You and Jon Arryn, I loved you both. What have you done to me? You were the one should have been king, you or Jon.”
劳勃又坐下来。“去你的，奈德·史塔克。你和琼恩·艾林，我这么爱你们，结果你们是怎么对我的？你或琼恩才应该来当国王。”
“You had the better claim, Your Grace.”
“陛下，您名正言顺，最有资格称王。”
“I told you to drink, not to argue. You made me king, you could at least have the courtesy to listen when I talk, damn you. Look at me, Ned. Look at what kinging has done to me. Gods, too fat for my armor, how did it ever come to this?”
“我叫你喝酒，没叫你顶嘴。妈的，你既然让我做了国王，好歹我说话的时候专心听行吧。奈德，你看看我，看看我当了国王之后变成什么样子。诸神在上，我竟然胖得穿不下自己的铠甲，怎么会搞成这样？”
“Robert …”
“劳勃……”
“Drink and stay quiet, the king is talking. I swear to you, I was never so alive as when I was winning this throne, or so dead as now that I’ve won it. And Cersei … I have Jon Arryn to thank for her. I had no wish to marry after Lyanna was taken from me, but Jon said the realm needed an heir. Cersei Lannister would be a good match, he told me, she would bind Lord Tywin to me should Viserys Targaryen ever try to win back his father’s throne,” The king shook his head. “I loved that old man, I swear it, but now I think he was a bigger fool than Moon Boy. Oh, Cersei is lovely to look at, truly, but cold … the way she guards her cunt, you’d think she had all the gold of Casterly Rock between her legs. Here, give me that beer if you won’t drink it.” He took the horn, upended it, belched, wiped his mouth. “I am sorry for your girl, Ned. Truly. About the wolf, I mean. My son was lying, I’d stake my soul on it. My son … you love your children, don’t you?”
“现在国王在说话，你闭上嘴乖乖喝酒。我跟你发誓，我这辈子再没比在战场厮杀、赢得王位那时候更快活，也不会比现在得了王位更死气沉沉。至于瑟曦……这全都要感谢琼恩·艾林。本来在失去莱安娜之后，我根本不打算结婚，但琼恩说王国需要继承人。他告诉我瑟曦·兰尼斯特是个好对象，因为若是韦赛里斯·坦格利安想夺回王位，和她结婚可以确保泰温公爵支持我的事业。”国王摇摇头。“我敢对天发誓我很敬爱那老头子，可我现在却觉得他比月童还笨。噢，瑟曦是很标致，这没错，但冷冰冰的……瞧她那副守身如玉的德行，好像两脚间藏了凯岩城所有黄金似的。呵，你如果不喝，把酒给我。”他接过角杯，一饮而尽，打了声响嗝，然后抹抹嘴。“奈德，你女儿的事我很抱歉，我说真的。就是狼的那件事。我儿子在撒谎，我敢拿我的灵魂打赌。我儿子……你很爱你的孩子，对吧？”
“With all my heart,” Ned said.
“我全心全意地爱他们。”奈德说。
“Let me tell you a secret, Ned. More than once, I have dreamed of giving up the crown. Take ship for the Free Cities with my horse and my hammer, spend my time warring and whoring, that’s what I was made for. The sellsword king, how the singers would love me. You know what stops me? The thought of Joffrey on the throne, with Cersei standing behind him whispering in his ear. My son. How could I have made a son like that, Ned?”
“奈德，让我偷偷告诉你。我不止一次梦想放弃王位，带着我的骏马和战锤，坐船到自由贸易城邦去，整天打仗历险、歌舞青楼，那才是我该过的生活。做个佣兵国王，到时候吟游诗人不爱死我才怪。你知道我为什么没有真那样干吗？就因为我想到乔佛里坐上王位，瑟曦在旁边叽叽喳喳。那是我儿子，奈德，我怎么会养出这种儿子？”
“He’s only a boy,” Ned said awkwardly. He had small liking for Prince Joffrey, but he could hear the pain in Robert’s voice. “Have you forgotten how wild you were at his age?”
“他还是个孩子，”奈德尴尬地说。他自己也不喜欢乔佛里王子，但他听得出劳勃语中的痛苦。“您忘了，我们在他这年纪有多野？”
“It would not trouble me if the boy was wild, Ned. You don’t know him as I do.” He sighed and shook his head. “Ah, perhaps you are right. Jon despaired of me often enough, yet I grew into a good king.” Robert looked at Ned and scowled at his silence. “You might speak up and agree now, you know.”
“奈德，他要真是野，我就不担心了。你没我了解他。”他叹口气，然后摇摇头，“啊，或许你说得对，虽然琼恩常对我绝望，我终究是成了个好国王。”劳勃看奈德不发话，皱了皱眉头。“这种时候你该出声附和。”
“Your Grace …” Ned began, carefully.
“国王陛下……”奈德谨慎地开口。
Robert slapped Ned on the back. “Ah, say that I’m a better king than Aerys and be done with it. You never could lie for love nor honor, Ned Stark. I’m still young, and now that you’re here with me, things will be different. We’ll make this a reign to sing of, and damn the Lannisters to seven hells. I smell bacon. Who do you think our champion will be today? Have you seen Mace Tyrell’s boy? The Knight of Flowers, they call him. Now there’s a son any man would be proud to own to. Last tourney, he dumped the Kingslayer on his golden rump, you ought to have seen the look on Cersei’s face. I laughed till my sides hurt. Renly says he has this sister, a maid of fourteen, lovely as a dawn …”
劳勃拍拍奈德的背。“啊，你就说我跟伊里斯比起来是个好国王不就结了？奈德·史塔克，我知道你没办法说谎，不管是为了爱还是为了荣誉。反正我还年轻，如今又有你辅佐，一切都会改观的。咱们一起来创造让后世歌颂的太平盛世，然后把兰尼斯特家的人通通打下第七层地狱。我闻到了培根的味道。你觉得今天的冠军会是谁？你见到梅斯·提利尔的孩子了吗？大家都叫他百花骑士，有这种儿子谁都会骄傲。上次比武会，他可让‘弑君者’的金屁股好好摔了一跤，你真该来瞅瞅瑟曦当时的表情，我笑到肚子痛。蓝礼说他还有个十四岁的妹妹，漂亮得跟曙光一样……”
They broke their fast on black bread and boiled goose eggs and fish fried up with onions and bacon, at a trestle table by the river’s edge. The king’s melancholy melted away with the morning mist, and before long Robert was eating an orange and waxing fond about a morning at the Eyrie when they had been boys. “… had given Jon a barrel of oranges, remember? Only the things had gone rotten, so I flung mine across the table and hit Dacks right in the nose. You remember, Redfort’s pock-faced squire? He tossed one back at me, and before Jon could so much as fart, there were oranges flying across the High Hall in every direction.” He laughed uproariously, and even Ned smiled, remembering.
他们坐在河边的折叠桌前吃早餐，有黑面包，水煮鹅蛋，还有洋葱培根煎鱼。国王先前的感伤随晨雾散去，片刻之后，劳勃便一边吃着柑子，一边开心地说起他们在鹰巢城的童年趣事。“记不记得那个谁送了琼恩一桶这种柑？可是都放烂了，所以我把我那份朝戴克斯扔去，正中他鼻梁。你记得吧？就是雷德佛那个麻脸侍从。他也扔了一个过来，结果琼恩连屁都来不及放，整个鹰巢城大厅就柑子满天飞了。”他开怀大笑，奈德想起往事，也不禁微笑。
This was the boy he had grown up with, he thought; this was the Robert Baratheon he’d known and loved. If he could prove that the Lannisters were behind the attack on Bran, prove that they had murdered Jon Arryn, this man would listen. Then Cersei would fall, and the Kingslayer with her, and if Lord Tywin dared to rouse the west, Robert would smash him as he had smashed Rhaegar Targaryen on the Trident. He could see it all so clearly.
这才是那个和他一起长大的男孩，他心想，这才是那个他认识而深爱的劳勃·拜拉席恩。如果他能证实兰尼斯特家是残害布兰的幕后主谋，证实他们是谋杀琼恩·艾林的凶犯，这个人一定会听进去。届时瑟曦必将受到制裁，“弑君者”也会跟着完蛋，倘若泰温公爵胆敢兴兵作乱，劳勃会像当年在三叉戟河上敲碎雷加·坦格利安一样，毫不留情地将他彻底击灭。他可以清楚地看到这一切。
That breakfast tasted better than anything Eddard Stark had eaten in a long time, and afterward his smiles came easier and more often, until it was time for the tournament to resume.
艾德·史塔克已经很久没有吃过这么愉快的一顿饭，之后他的笑容也变得轻松自如，直到比武大会继续进行。
Ned walked with the king to the jousting field. He had promised to watch the final tilts with Sansa; Septa Mordane was ill today, and his daughter was determined not to miss the end of the jousting. As he saw Robert to his place, he noted that Cersei Lannister had chosen not to appear; the place beside the king was empty. That too gave Ned cause to hope.
奈德随同国王走进比武会场。他先前已经答应陪珊莎一起观赏冠军决胜战。茉丹修女今天身体不适，而他女儿心意已决，不想错过最后的长枪比试。当他护送劳勃到主位坐下时，发现瑟曦·兰尼斯特故意缺席，国王旁边的座位是空的。这更增添了他的希望。
He shouldered his way to where his daughter was seated and found her as the horns blew for the day’s first joust. Sansa was so engrossed she scarcely seemed to notice his arrival.
他推挤着穿过人群，走到女儿身边时，当天第一场比武的号角正好吹响。珊莎聚精会神地看着武场，没注意他的到来。
Sandor Clegane was the first rider to appear. He wore an olive-green cloak over his soot-grey armor. That, and his hound’s-head helm, were his only concession to ornament.
桑铎·克里冈首先出现在场子上，他穿着烟灰色的战甲，外罩橄榄绿披风。那件披风和他的猎犬头盔是他全身上下惟一的装饰。
“A hundred golden dragons on the Kingslayer,” Littlefinger announced loudly as Jaime Lannister entered the lists, riding an elegant blood bay destrier. The horse wore a blanket of gilded ringmail, and Jaime glittered from head to heel. Even his lance was fashioned from the golden wood of the Summer Isles.
“一百枚金龙币赌弑君者赢。”詹姆·兰尼斯特骑着优雅的血棕色战马进场时，小指头高声宣布。这匹马披着镀金环甲，詹姆本人也是从头到脚金光闪闪，他的长枪则是用盛夏群岛出产的金木所削制。
“Done,” Lord Renly shouted back. “The Hound has a hungry look about him this morning.”
“我跟，”蓝礼公爵喊回去，“我看‘猎狗’今儿早上特别饿。”
“Even hungry dogs know better than to bite the hand that feeds them,” Littlefinger called dryly.
“狗就算肚饿，也知道不能咬主人的手。”小指头冷冷地回敬。
Sandor Clegane dropped his visor with an audible clang and took up his position. Ser Jaime tossed a kiss to some woman in the commons, gently lowered his visor, and rode to the end of the lists. Both men couched their lances.
桑铎·克里冈“铿”地一声，把面罩盖上，然后就位。詹姆爵士向群众里某位女士抛出个飞吻，方才轻轻拉下面罩，骑到场子边。两人放低长枪。
Ned Stark would have loved nothing so well as to see them both lose, but Sansa was watching it all moist-eyed and eager. The hastily erected gallery trembled as the horses broke into a gallop. The Hound leaned forward as he rode, his lance rock steady, but Jaime shifted his seat deftly in the instant before impact. Clegane’s point was turned harmlessly against the golden shield with the lion blazon, while his own hit square. Wood shattered, and the Hound reeled, fighting to keep his seat. Sansa gasped. A ragged cheer went up from the commons.
奈德最乐于见到的莫过于两人都输，珊莎则睁大眼睛急切观看。两匹马开始全速奔跑，临时搭建的看台也随之震动。猎狗骑在马上，身体前倾，他的长枪稳若磐石，但詹姆在交击前的一刻把身体一挪，结果克里冈的枪尖被他的狮纹黄金盾毫发无伤地卸开，自己反被刺个正着。木片四散，“猎狗”在马背上摇晃，差点跌了下去。珊莎倒抽一口冷气。群众里响起一阵粗声的叫好。
“I wonder how I ought spend your money,” Littlefinger called down to Lord Renly.
“我该想想怎么来花你的钱了。”小指头对蓝礼公爵说。
The Hound just managed to stay in his saddle. He jerked his mount around hard and rode back to the lists for the second pass. Jaime Lannister tossed down his broken lance and snatched up a fresh one, jesting with his squire. The Hound spurred forward at a hard gallop. Lannister rode to meet him. This time, when Jaime shifted his seat, Sandor Clegane shifted with him. Both lances exploded, and by the time the splinters had settled, a riderless blood bay was trotting off in search of grass while Ser Jaime Lannister rolled in the dirt, golden and dented.
猎狗总算还是稳住身子没掉下去，他猛地勒马转身，骑回场边准备第二回合。詹姆·兰尼斯特抛下断枪，抓起一支新矛，还跟侍从开了个玩笑。猎狗用力一夹马肚，策骑前奔，兰尼斯特也骑马相迎。这回当詹姆挪动身子时，桑铎·克里冈也跟着躯体一侧。两枝长枪同时爆裂，但等木片落地，那匹红棕色的马却少了主人，独自跑开去吃草了。詹姆·兰尼斯特爵士在泥地里打滚，金光闪闪，头盔却给打凹。
Sansa said, “I knew the Hound would win.”
珊莎说：“我就知道猎狗会赢。”
Littlefinger overheard. “If you know who’s going to win the second match, speak up now before Lord Renly plucks me clean,” he called to her. Ned smiled.
这话给小指头听到了。“你要是知道第二场的赢家，赶快告诉我，免得蓝礼大人把我拔得一毛不剩。”他朝她喊。奈德听了不禁微笑。
“A pity the Imp is not here with us,” Lord Renly said. “I should have won twice as much.”
“只可惜小恶魔不在，”蓝礼公爵道，“不然我还可以多赢一倍。”
Jaime Lannister was back on his feet, but his ornate lion helmet had been twisted around and dented in his fall, and now he could not get it off. The commons were hooting and pointing, the lords and ladies were trying to stifle their chuckles, and failing, and over it all Ned could hear King Robert laughing, louder than anyone. Finally they had to lead the Lion of Lannister off to a blacksmith, blind and stumbling.
詹姆·兰尼斯特爬了起来，但他装饰繁复的狮头盔被打歪了一边，摔下来的时候又给撞凹了进去，结果他无法把头盔摘下来。观众指指点点，嘘声连连，贵族老爷夫人们也忍不住笑，众声喧哗中，奈德听得最清楚的便是劳勃国王的阵阵哄笑，比谁都大声。最后只好派人领着目不视物、跌跌撞撞的“兰尼斯特雄狮”去找铁匠。
By then Ser Gregor Clegane was in position at the head of the lists. He was huge, the biggest man that Eddard Stark had ever seen. Robert Baratheon and his brothers were all big men, as was the Hound, and back at Winterfell there was a simpleminded stableboy named Hodor who dwarfed them all, but the knight they called the Mountain That Rides would have towered over Hodor. He was well over seven feet tall, closer to eight, with massive shoulders and arms thick as the trunks of small trees. His destrier seemed a pony in between his armored legs, and the lance he carried looked as small as a broom handle.
这时格雷果·克里冈已经在场边就位。他是艾德·史塔克生平所见最为高大壮硕的人。劳勃·拜拉席恩和他两个弟弟块头都不小，“猎狗”也是大个子，临冬城里更有个头脑简单的马僮阿多，比他们还要高出不少，可跟眼前这个人称“魔山”的骑士比起来，通通都矮了一大截。他高近八尺，肩膀宽厚，手臂粗得像小树干。他的坐骑在他穿护甲的双脚下简直像匹玩具马，手中长枪也仿如扫把棍。
Unlike his brother, Ser Gregor did not live at court. He was a solitary man who seldom left his own lands, but for wars and tourneys. He had been with Lord Tywin when King’s Landing fell, a new-made knight of seventeen years, even then distinguished by his size and his implacable ferocity. Some said it had been Gregor who’d dashed the skull of the infant prince Aegon Targaryen against a wall, and whispered that afterward he had raped the mother, the Dornish princess Elia, before putting her to the sword. These things were not said in Gregor’s hearing.
格雷果爵士不像他弟弟那样在宫廷生活。他是个独居的人，非遇战事或比武大会，鲜少离开自己的领地。君临城陷时他跟在泰温公爵身边，年方十七，虽然才刚当上骑士，却已经因为高大的体型和无可匹敌的凶暴而远近驰名。有人说把当时还是小婴儿的伊耿·坦格利安王子一头砸墙、活活撞死的人正是格雷果，又说他之后强暴了婴儿的母亲，即多恩领的伊莉亚公主，最后才一剑杀死她。当然，这些话谁也不敢在他面前提起。
Ned Stark could not recall ever speaking to the man, though Gregor had ridden with them during Balon Greyjoy’s rebellion, one knight among thousands. He watched him with disquiet. Ned seldom put much stock in gossip, but the things said of Ser Gregor were more than ominous. He was soon to be married for the third time, and one heard dark whisperings about the deaths of his first two wives. It was said that his keep was a grim place where servants disappeared unaccountably and even the dogs were afraid to enter the hall. And there had been a sister who had died young under queer circumstances, and the fire that had disfigured his brother, and the hunting accident that had killed their father. Gregor had inherited the keep, the gold, and the family estates. His younger brother Sandor had left the same day to take service with the Lannisters as a sworn sword, and it was said that he had never returned, not even to visit.
奈德·史塔克不记得自己跟他说过话，但当年平定巴隆·葛雷乔伊叛乱时，格雷果倒曾与其他几千个骑士一起，和他共同作战。他不安地看着他。奈德自己不轻易相信谣言，然而与格雷果爵士有关的传言实在不像空穴来风。他即将结第三次婚，他前两任妻子的死因背后都有种种恐怖的传闻。据说他的城堡是个阴森恐怖的地方，仆人莫名失踪，连狗都不大敢进大厅。他妹妹年轻时离奇死亡，弟弟遭火残伤，还有死于打猎意外的父亲。格雷果继承了家族古堡、财产以及房舍田庄。接收遗产当天，弟弟桑铎便离开家，投效兰尼斯特家当武士，听说他再没回去过，连路过拜访都没有。
When the Knight of Flowers made his entrance, a murmur ran through the crowd, and he heard Sansa’s fervent whisper, “Oh, he’s so beautiful.” Ser Loras Tyrell was slender as a reed, dressed in a suit of fabulous silver armor polished to a blinding sheen and filigreed with twining black vines and tiny blue forget-me-nots. The commons realized in the same instant as Ned that the blue of the flowers came from sapphires; a gasp went up from a thousand throats. Across the boy’s shoulders his cloak hung heavy. It was woven of forget-me-nots, real ones, hundreds of fresh blooms sewn to a heavy woolen cape.
百花骑士进场时，人群中响起一阵低语喧哗，他听见珊莎热切地悄声说：“噢，他好美啊。”洛拉斯·提利尔爵士纤瘦得像根芦苇，穿着一身华丽无比的银色甲胄，擦得银亮刺眼，上面还镶了成对的黑色藤蔓和小小的蓝色勿忘我。奈德和其他观众惊觉蓝色的花乃是用蓝宝石制成，几千个喉咙同时倒抽一口气。少年肩头的披风沉甸甸的，披风上织满了真的勿忘我，羊毛披风就这么缝上了几百朵鲜花。
His courser was as slim as her rider, a beautiful grey mare, built for speed. Ser Gregor’s huge stallion trumpeted as he caught her scent. The boy from Highgarden did something with his legs, and his horse pranced sideways, nimble as a dancer. Sansa clutched at his arm. “Father, don’t let Ser Gregor hurt him,” she said. Ned saw she was wearing the rose that Ser Loras had given her yesterday. Jory had told him about that as well.
他的坐骑与马上的人儿同样纤细，那是匹漂亮的灰母马，动作敏捷迅速。格雷果爵士的大公马一嗅到她的气味便嘶叫起来。高庭来的少年两脚轻轻一拨弄，他的坐骑便像个灵动的舞者般左右轻跃。珊莎抓住他的手臂。“父亲，别让格雷果爵士伤了他。”她说。奈德看见她配戴着洛拉斯爵士昨天送她的那朵玫瑰。乔里把昨天发生的事都告诉他了。
“These are tourney lances,” he told his daughter. “They make them to splinter on impact, so no one is hurt.” Yet he remembered the dead boy in the cart with his cloak of crescent moons, and the words were raw in his throat.
“他们拿的是比武用枪，”他告诉女儿，“一碰撞就会裂成碎片，所以不会有人受伤的。”嘴上这么讲，他却想起了货车里那个盖着弯月披风的少年尸体，这番话也因而显得空洞。
Ser Gregor was having trouble controlling his horse. The stallion was screaming and pawing the ground, shaking his head. The Mountain kicked at the animal savagely with an armored boot. The horse reared and almost threw him.
格雷果爵士不太能控制自己的坐骑。骏马尖叫嘶啼，不断跺脚摇头。魔山恶狠狠地用套钢甲的脚踢它，马儿后腿站立，差点把他摔下去。
The Knight of Flowers saluted the king, rode to the far end of the list, and couched his lance, ready. Ser Gregor brought his animal to the line, fighting with the reins. And suddenly it began. The Mountain’s stallion broke in a hard gallop, plunging forward wildly, while the mare charged as smooth as a flow of silk. Ser Gregor wrenched his shield into position, juggled with his lance, and all the while fought to hold his unruly mount on a straight line, and suddenly Loras Tyrell was on him, placing the point of his lance just there , and in an eye blink the Mountain was falling. He was so huge that he took his horse down with him in a tangle of steel and flesh.
百花骑士向国王行过礼，骑到场子边缘，然后放低长枪，就定位。格雷果爵士拉缰扯绳好半天，好不容易才将马带到起跑线，然后一切就突然开始。魔山的骏马大步急驰，猛烈地向前狂奔，小母马则流畅如滑丝般开步冲刺。格雷果爵士扭过盾牌放定，调整长枪，自始至终努力让他不听话的马跑直线，突然间，洛拉斯·提利尔已经迎面杀至，枪尖突击恰到好处，只一眨眼功夫，魔山便倒了下去。由于他委实太过庞大，因此连带把马也拉倒，人马铠甲滚成一团。
Ned heard applause, cheers, whistles, shocked gasps, excited muttering, and over it all the rasping, raucous laughter of the Hound. The Knight of Flowers reined up at the end of the lists. His lance was not even broken. His sapphires winked in the sun as he raised his visor, smiling. The commons went mad for him.
奈德听见喝彩声，欢呼声，口哨声，惊骇的喘气声，兴奋的低语声，尤其是“猎狗”粗哑刺耳的笑声。百花骑士在场子对面勒住缰绳，连长枪都没折断。当他掀开面罩，露出微笑的时候，一身的蓝宝石在阳光下眨眼，全体观众为他而疯狂。
In the middle of the field, Ser Gregor Clegane disentangled himself and came boiling to his feet. He wrenched off his helm and slammed it down onto the ground. His face was dark with fury and his hair fell down into his eyes. “My sword,” he shouted to his squire, and the boy ran it out to him. By then his stallion was back on its feet as well.
场子中间，格雷果·克里冈爵士总算松开缰绳和马镫，怒气冲天地站起来。他猛地扯下头盔往地上一摔，脸色阴沉，满是怒意，头发垂下，盖住眼睛。“拿剑来。”他朝侍从大喊，那孩子赶忙跑上前递给他。这时他的坐骑也站起来了。
Gregor Clegane killed the horse with a single blow of such ferocity that it half severed the animal’s neck. Cheers turned to shrieks in a heartbeat. The stallion went to its knees, screaming as it died. By then Gregor was striding down the lists toward Ser Loras Tyrell, his bloody sword clutched in his fist. “Stop him!” Ned shouted, but his words were lost in the roar. Everyone else was yelling as well, and Sansa was crying.
格雷果·克里冈一剑砍杀了他的马，力道之猛烈，几乎把马头整个剁下。欢呼瞬间转为尖叫。马儿惨叫着跪地而死，格雷果握着滴血的长剑朝场边的洛拉斯·提利尔爵士走去。“抓住他！”奈德大叫，但他的话音淹没在吼叫声中。每个人都在大吼大叫，珊莎则泣不成声。
It all happened so fast. The Knight of Flowers was shouting for his own sword as Ser Gregor knocked his squire aside and made a grab for the reins of his horse. The mare scented blood and reared. Loras Tyrell kept his seat, but barely. Ser Gregor swung his sword, a savage two-handed blow that took the boy in the chest and knocked him from the saddle. The courser dashed away in panic as Ser Loras lay stunned in the dirt. But as Gregor lifted his sword for the killing blow, a rasping voice warned, “Leave him be,” and a steel-clad hand wrenched him away from the boy.
一切都发生得好快。百花骑士也喊着要剑，但格雷果爵士把他的侍从推开，伸手抓住缰绳。小母马闻到血腥味，吓得后脚站立，洛拉斯·提利尔差点摔下马去。格雷果爵士双手握剑，猛力朝少年的胸部挥击，立刻把他从马鞍上轰飞出去。受惊的坐骑立即跑开，洛拉斯爵士则昏倒在泥地上。正当格雷果举剑准备致命一击时，一个嘶哑的声音警告他：“不要碰他。”紧接着，一只戴了钢护腕的手便将他自少年身边硬生生地扭开。
The Mountain pivoted in wordless fury, swinging his longsword in a killing arc with all his massive strength behind it, but the Hound caught the blow and turned it, and for what seemed an eternity the two brothers stood hammering at each other as a dazed Loras Tyrell was helped to safety. Thrice Ned saw Ser Gregor aim savage blows at the hound’s-head helmet, yet not once did Sandor send a cut at his brother’s unprotected face.
“魔山”无声地愤怒转身，使尽他惊人的力气狠命攻击，但猎狗接下这招，卸开攻势。其后不知有多长时间，他们两个就站在那里你来我往，余人则赶紧搀扶头晕目眩的洛拉斯·提利尔到安全的地方。奈德看到格雷果爵士有三次朝那顶猎犬头盔猛击，但桑铎一次也没有攻击他哥哥毫无保护的头部。
It was the king’s voice that put an end to it … the king’s voice and twenty swords. Jon Arryn had told them that a commander needs a good battlefield voice, and Robert had proved the truth of that on the Trident. He used that voice now. “STOP THIS MADNESS,” he boomed, “IN THE NAME OF YOUR KING!”
最后是国王的声音平息了这场混乱……国王的声音和二十名武士。琼恩·艾林曾说指挥官需要一副能在战场上发挥功效的好嗓门，当年劳勃在三叉戟河上已证实过这点，如今他又用上了这副嗓门。“以你们的国王之名，”他吼道，“立刻给我住手！”
The Hound went to one knee. Ser Gregor’s blow cut air, and at last he came to his senses. He dropped his sword and glared at Robert, surrounded by his Kingsguard and a dozen other knights and guardsmen. Wordlessly, he turned and strode off, shoving past Barristan Selmy. “Let him go,” Robert said, and as quickly as that, it was over.
猎狗闻言立刻单膝跪下，格雷果爵士的挥砍扑了空，这才恢复理性。他抛下剑，瞪了劳勃一眼。国王身边围绕着御林铁卫，还有十来个骑士和卫兵。他推开巴利斯坦·赛尔弥，一言不发地转身大跨步离去。“让他去吧。”劳勃道。事情就这么结束了。
“Is the Hound the champion now?” Sansa asked Ned.
“猎狗现在是冠军了吗？”珊莎问奈德。
“No,” he told her. “There will be one final joust, between the Hound and the Knight of Flowers.”
“不是，”他告诉她，“猎狗和百花骑士还得再比一场。”
But Sansa had the right of it after all. A few moments later Ser Loras Tyrell walked back onto the field in a simple linen doublet and said to Sandor Clegane, “I owe you my life. The day is yours, ser.”
但珊莎说对了。几分钟后，洛拉斯·提利尔爵士穿着一件朴素的亚麻外衣走回场内，对桑铎·克里冈说：“我欠您一条命，胜利是您的了，爵士阁下。”
“I am no ser,” the Hound replied, but he took the victory, and the champion’s purse, and, for perhaps the first time in his life, the love of the commons. They cheered him as he left the lists to return to his pavilion.
“我不是什么‘爵士阁下’。”猎狗回答，但他还是接受了胜利、奖金，以及或许是他这辈子头一遭的群众爱戴。当他离开场子返回营帐的时候，众人欢声雷动，为他喝彩。
As Ned walked with Sansa to the archery field, Littlefinger and Lord Renly and some of the others fell in with them. “Tyrell had to know the mare was in heat,” Littlefinger was saying. “I swear the boy planned the whole thing. Gregor has always favored huge, ill-tempered stallions with more spirit than sense.” The notion seemed to amuse him.
奈德和珊莎正走在前往射箭场的路上，小指头、蓝礼公爵和其他几位人物跟了过来。“提利尔一定知道那母马正在发情，”小指头说，“我敢对天发誓那小子是事先计划好的。格雷果向来偏好个头大、脾气坏、野性有余而纪律不足的马。”他饶富兴味地推论。
It did not amuse Ser Barristan Selmy. “There is small honor in tricks,” the old man said stiffly.
巴利斯坦·赛尔弥爵士不以为然。“耍这种伎俩毫无荣誉可言。”老人固执地说。
“Small honor and twenty thousand golds.” Lord Renly smiled.
“没有荣誉，但足以赢得两万金龙。”蓝礼公爵微笑道。
That afternoon a boy named Anguy, an unheralded commoner from the Dornish Marches, won the archery competition, outshooting Ser Balon Swann and Jalabhar Xho at a hundred paces after all the other bowmen had been eliminated at the shorter distances. Ned sent Alyn to seek him out and offer him a position with the Hand’s guard, but the boy was flush with wine and victory and riches undreamed of, and he refused.
当天下午，有个来自多恩边疆，名叫安盖的升斗小民在淘汰其他射程较短的对手后，在百步射击的决赛中击败巴隆·史文爵士和贾拉巴·梭尔，摘下箭术冠军。奈德派埃林去问他有没有兴趣在首相的侍卫队里谋个职位，但那男孩正沉浸在美酒、胜利以及作梦都想像不到的财富中，因此拒绝了这份差事。
The melee went on for three hours. Near forty men took part, freeriders and hedge knights and new-made squires in search of a reputation. They fought with blunted weapons in a chaos of mud and blood, small troops fighting together and then turning on each other as alliances formed and fractured, until only one man was left standing. The victor was the red priest, Thoros of Myr, a madman who shaved his head and fought with a flaming sword. He had won melees before; the fire sword frightened the mounts of the other riders, and nothing frightened Thoros. The final tally was three broken limbs, a shattered collarbone, a dozen smashed fingers, two horses that had to be put down, and more cuts, sprains, and bruises than anyone cared to count. Ned was desperately pleased that Robert had not taken part.
团体比武则打了三个小时。总共有近四十人参加，多半是有意谋求功名的自由骑手、雇佣骑士和刚受策封的侍从。他们手持钝器，在烂泥四溅、鲜血喷飞的场地里相互拼杀，一会儿组成小队联手抗敌，转眼间又闹起内讧自相残杀，同盟才刚组成便告破裂，直到最后只剩一人站立。胜利者是密尔来的索罗斯，就是那个手持火焰剑，剃了光头，十足狂人模样的红袍僧。他以前也拿过比武冠军，因为其他骑士的马儿都怕极了他那把火焰剑，可他自己却什么都不怕。最后的伤亡名单包括两只断腿，一条碎掉的锁骨，十几根打烂的手指，两匹不得不处理掉的马，以及多到大家懒得数的割伤、扭伤和擦伤。奈德万分庆幸劳勃没有参加。
That night at the feast, Eddard Stark was more hopeful than he had been in a great while. Robert was in high good humor, the Lannisters were nowhere to be seen, and even his daughters were behaving. Jory brought Arya down to join them, and Sansa spoke to her sister pleasantly. “The tournament was magnificent,” she sighed. “You should have come. How was your dancing?”
当天晚宴席间，艾德·史塔克对未来感到前所未有的乐观与希望。劳勃兴致正好，兰尼斯特家的人则通通缺席，连他两个女儿的表现也令人欣喜。乔里把艾莉亚带过来跟他们同坐，珊莎开心地主动跟妹妹说话。“比武大会真是棒透了，”她惊叹道，“你真该一起来的。你舞跳得怎么样了？”
“I’m sore all over,” Arya reported happily, proudly displaying a huge purple bruise on her leg.
“练得浑身酸痛呢。”艾莉亚开心地报告进度，并且骄傲地展示腿上一大块紫色瘀伤。
“You must be a terrible dancer,” Sansa said doubtfully.
“我看你舞跳得一定很糟。”珊莎满腹狐疑地说。
Later, while Sansa was off listening to a troupe of singers perform the complex round of interwoven ballads called the “Dance of the Dragons,” Ned inspected the bruise himself. “I hope Forel is not being too hard on you,” he said.
之后珊莎去听一个歌手团队演唱一组由许多叙事诗构成，名叫“血龙狂舞”的组曲，奈德则亲自检查了小女儿的瘀伤。“我希望佛瑞尔没对你太过严苛。”
Arya stood on one leg. She was getting much better at that of late. “Syrio says that every hurt is a lesson, and every lesson makes you better.”
艾莉亚单脚站立，近来她越来越擅长此道。“西利欧说每次受伤都是一次教训，而每次教训都让我们更强。”
Ned frowned. The man Syrio Forel had come with an excellent reputation, and his flamboyant Braavosi style was well suited to Arya’s slender blade, yet still … a few days ago, she had been wandering around with a swatch of black silk tied over her eyes. Syrio was teaching her to see with her ears and her nose and her skin, she told him. Before that, he had her doing spins and back flips. “Arya, are you certain you want to persist in this?”
奈德听了不禁皱眉。西利欧·佛瑞尔颇具盛名，而他夸张华丽的布拉佛斯风格也很适合艾莉亚纤细的剑，然而……几天前她绑了条黑丝巾遮住眼睛，到处晃来晃去，告诉他说西利欧教她要用耳朵、鼻子和皮肤去感知四周环境。在那之前，他又叫她练习前后滚翻。“艾莉亚，你真的要继续学下去？”
She nodded. “Tomorrow we’re going to catch cats.”
她点点头。“明天我们开始抓猫。”
“Cats.” Ned sighed. “Perhaps it was a mistake to hire this Braavosi. If you like, I will ask Jory to take over your lessons. Or I might have a quiet word with Ser Barristan. He was the finest sword in the Seven Kingdoms in his youth.”
“抓猫。”奈德叹道，“或许我不该雇这布拉佛斯人来教你。你愿意的话，我就请乔里接手，由他来教。不然我也可以跟巴利斯坦说一声，他年轻时是七国上下最优秀的使剑好手。”
“I don’t want them,” Arya said. “I want Syrio.”
“我不要他们，”艾莉亚说，“我只要西利欧。”
Ned ran his fingers through his hair. Any decent master-at-arms could give Arya the rudiments of slash-and-parry without this nonsense of blindfolds, cartwheels, and hopping about on one leg, but he knew his youngest daughter well enough to know there was no arguing with that stubborn jut of jaw. “As you wish,” he said. Surely she would grow tired of this soon. “Try to be careful.”
奈德伸手拨拨头发。其实，随便一个还过得去的教头，都可以教艾莉亚基础的砍劈和挡格，用不着这些蒙眼睛走路、翻跟斗和单脚跳跃的把戏。但他太了解自己小女儿的个性，知道跟她那固执的下巴争吵毫无用处。“那就西利欧吧。”反正她迟早也会玩腻。“不过你一定要小心。”
“I will,” she promised solemnly as she hopped smoothly from her right leg to her left.
“我会的。”她一本正经地向他保证，然后平顺地从右脚跳到左脚。
Much later, after he had taken the girls back through the city and seen them both safe in bed, Sansa with her dreams and Arya with her bruises, Ned ascended to his own chambers atop the Tower of the Hand. The day had been warm and the room was close and stuffy. Ned went to the window and unfastened the heavy shutters to let in the cool night air. Across the Great Yard, he noticed the flickering glow of candlelight from Littlefinger’s windows. The hour was well past midnight. Down by the river, the revels were only now beginning to dwindle and die.
当天晚上，在他带女儿们回到城里，送她们上床，看着满脑子白日梦的珊莎和浑身是伤的艾莉亚分别安然入梦之后，奈德这才步上首相塔顶，返回自己的起居室。白天气候暖和，因此房里现在显得十分郁窒。奈德走到窗边，打开沉重的扣锁，让清凉的晚风吹进室内。隔着广大的中庭，他注意到小指头窗里的摇曳烛光。时间已过午夜，但在远处河边，喧闹声才刚开始稍稍减退。
He took out the dagger and studied it. Littlefinger’s blade, won by Tyrion Lannister in a tourney wager, sent to slay Bran in his sleep. Why would the dwarf want Bran dead? Why would anyone want Bran dead?
他取出匕首，仔细检视。小指头的刀，在比武大会上打赌输给提利昂·兰尼斯特，被用来对熟睡的布兰痛下杀手。为什么？为什么那侏儒要置布兰于死地？怎么会有人要置布兰于死地？
The dagger, Bran’s fall, all of it was linked somehow to the murder of Jon Arryn, he could feel it in his gut, but the truth of Jon’s death remained as clouded to him as when he had started. Lord Stannis had not returned to King’s Landing for the tourney. Lysa Arryn held her silence behind the high walls of the Eyrie. The squire was dead, and Jory was still searching the whorehouses. What did he have but Robert’s bastard?
他隐约觉得这把短刀、布兰坠楼都与谋害琼恩·艾林有所牵连，但琼恩的死亡真相像个谜团，他依旧毫无头绪。史坦尼斯公爵并未返回君临参加比武大会，莱莎·艾林则躲在鹰巢城高墙之后，噤若寒蝉。琼恩的侍从已死，乔里仍在一家家妓院里逡巡。除了劳勃的私生子，他手上究竟还有什么线索？
That the armorer’s sullen apprentice was the king’s son, Ned had no doubt. The Baratheon look was stamped on his face, in his jaw, his eyes, that black hair. Renly was too young to have fathered a boy of that age, Stannis too cold and proud in his honor. Gendry had to be Robert’s.
毫无疑问，武器师傅那个脸色阴沉的学徒正是国王的儿子，这点奈德很清楚。拜拉席恩家族的特征清楚地印在他脸上，他的下巴、眼睛和黑发无一不是明证。蓝礼太年轻，不可能有那么大的儿子，史坦尼斯则是太冷酷也太重视荣誉，不会做出这种事。詹德利一定是劳勃的种。
Yet knowing all that, what had he learned? The king had other baseborn children scattered throughout the Seven Kingdoms. He had openly acknowledged one of his bastards, a boy of Bran’s age whose mother was highborn. The lad was being fostered by Lord Renly’s castellan at Storm’s End.
即便如此，他又能从中发现什么？国王所生的孩子遍及七国全境。他曾公开承认过一个和布兰年纪相仿的私生子，男孩的母亲是贵族，现在交由蓝礼公爵的风息堡代理城主收养。
Ned remembered Robert’s first child as well, a daughter born in the Vale when Robert was scarcely more than a boy himself. A sweet little girl; the young lord of Storm’s End had doted on her. He used to make daily visits to play with the babe, long after he had lost interest in the mother. Ned was often dragged along for company, whether he willed it or not. The girl would be seventeen or eighteen now, he realized; older than Robert had been when he fathered her. A strange thought.
奈德也记得劳勃的第一个孩子，是他还在艾林谷时所生的女儿，当时他自己都还稚气未脱。那是个可爱的小女孩，风息堡的年轻领主对她宠爱有加，即便他早就对孩子的母亲失去了兴趣，那阵子还是天天去逗女儿玩。而且不论奈德愿意与否，每每被抓去作伴。他突然想到，那女孩现在该有十七八岁了，比劳勃生她时的年纪还大，想来真有些怪异。
Cersei could not have been pleased by her lord husband’s by-blows, yet in the end it mattered little whether the king had one bastard or a hundred. Law and custom gave the baseborn few rights. Gendry, the girl in the Vale, the boy at Storm’s End, none of them could threaten Robert’s trueborn children …
对于她主君到处留种的行径，瑟曦想必不会高兴，但到头来不论国王有一个私生子还是一百个都没有差别，毕竟根据法律和习俗，庶出的子嗣享有的权利极为有限。不管詹德利，艾林谷的女孩，或者是风息堡那小子，全都不可能威胁到劳勃与王后所生的孩子……
His musings were ended by a soft rap on his door. “A man to see you, my lord,” Harwin called. “He will not give his name.”
他的思绪被门上一阵轻敲打断。“大人，有人想见您，”哈尔温喊，“他不肯通报姓名。”
“Send him in,” Ned said, wondering.
“让他进来。”奈德纳闷地说。
The visitor was a stout man in cracked, mud-caked boots and a heavy brown robe of the coarsest roughspun, his features hidden by a cowl, his hands drawn up into voluminous sleeves.
访客体格粗壮，穿着沾满泥泞的破烂靴子，披着用极粗糙的料子制成的厚重褐色长袍，面容被蒙头斗篷遮住，两手藏在重重叠叠的袖子里。
“Who are you?” Ned asked.
“请问您是？”奈德问。
“A friend,” the cowled man said in a strange, low voice. “We must speak alone, Lord Stark.”
“我是您的朋友。”蒙面人用怪异的低沉腔调说，“史塔克大人，我们得单独谈谈。”
Curiosity was stronger than caution. “Harwin, leave us,” he commanded. Not until they were alone behind closed doors did his visitor draw back his cowl.
好奇胜过了警戒心。“哈尔温，你先退下。”他命令。等门关上，房里只剩他们两人之后，这位访客方才掀开斗篷。
“Lord Varys?” Ned said in astonishment.
“瓦里斯大人？”奈德惊讶地说。
“Lord Stark,” Varys said politely, seating himself. “I wonder if I might trouble you for a drink?”
“史塔克大人，”瓦里斯彬彬有礼地道，然后自己坐了下来。“不知可否麻烦您给我点喝的？”
Ned filled two cups with summerwine and handed one to Varys. “I might have passed within a foot of you and never recognized you,” he said, incredulous. He had never seen the eunuch dress in anything but silk and velvet and the richest damasks, and this man smelled of sweat instead of lilacs.
奈德倒了两杯夏日红，递给瓦里斯一杯。“打扮成这样，恐怕我在你鼻子底下也认不出来。”他难以置信地说。除了丝绸、天鹅绒和最上等的锦缎，他从来没见太监穿过其他质料的衣服。太监向来一身紫丁香味，然而眼前此人却浑身汗臭。
“That was my dearest hope,” Varys said. “It would not do if certain people learned that we had spoken in private. The queen watches you closely. This wine is very choice. Thank you.”
“我正希望如此。”瓦里斯道，“绝不能让别人知道我们私下密谈的事。您的一举一动，王后都监视得很紧。这酒好极了，谢谢您。”
“How did you get past my other guards?” Ned asked. Porther and Cayn had been posted outside the tower, and Alyn on the stairs.
“你是怎么通过我其他守卫的？”奈德问。波瑟和凯恩派驻塔外，埃林则守在楼梯口。
“The Red Keep has ways known only to ghosts and spiders.” Varys smiled apologetically. “I will not keep you long, my lord. There are things you must know. You are the King’s Hand, and the king is a fool.” The eunuch’s cloying tones were gone; now his voice was thin and sharp as a whip. “Your friend, I know, yet a fool nonetheless … and doomed, unless you save him. Today was a near thing. They had hoped to kill him during the melee.”
“红堡里有些密道只有幽灵和蜘蛛才知道。”瓦里斯歉然微笑，“我不会打扰您太久，大人，不过有些事您必须知情。您是御前首相，但国王却是蠢才一个。”太监从前的甜腻语调不再，取而代之的是轻细且锐利如鞭的口气。“我知道他是您的挚友，但蠢才就是蠢才……而且恐怕是个注定要完蛋的蠢才，除非您能救他。今天差一点就让他们得逞，他们原本计划在团体比武时谋害他。”
For a moment Ned was speechless with shock. “Who?”
好半晌奈德震惊得说不出话。“他们指谁？”
Varys sipped his wine. “If I truly need to tell you that, you are a bigger fool than Robert and I am on the wrong side.”
瓦里斯啜了口酒，“如果连这个都还要我告诉你，那我看你比劳勃还蠢，而我显然站错了队。”
“The Lannisters,” Ned said. “The queen … no, I will not believe that, not even of Cersei. She asked him not to fight!”
“兰尼斯特，”奈德道，“王后……不，我不相信，即使瑟曦也不可能做出这种事，她明明就叫他不要参加！”
“She forbade him to fight, in front of his brother, his knights, and half the court. Tell me truly, do you know any surer way to force King Robert into the melee? I ask you.”
“她禁止他参加，而且是当着他弟弟，当着他手下骑士，以及半数廷臣的面说的。说真的，敢问您知道什么更好的方法，可以逼得国王不得不参加团体比武？您倒是说说看。”
Ned had a sick feeling in his gut. The eunuch had hit upon a truth; tell Robert Baratheon he could not, should not, or must not do a thing, and it was as good as done. “Even if he’d fought, who would have dared to strike the king?”
奈德只觉得反胃。太监说得没错，叫劳勃不准做这，不该做那，绝对不可以如此这般，那就跟催促他没两样。“就算他真的下场，谁敢动手打国王？”
Varys shrugged. “There were forty riders in the melee. The Lannisters have many friends. Amidst all that chaos, with horses screaming and bones breaking and Thoros of Myr waving that absurd firesword of his, who could name it murder if some chance blow felled His Grace?” He went to the flagon and refilled his cup. “After the deed was done, the slayer would be beside himself with grief. I can almost hear him weeping. So sad. Yet no doubt the gracious and compassionate widow would take pity, lift the poor unfortunate to his feet, and bless him with a gentle kiss of forgiveness. Good King Joffrey would have no choice but to pardon him.” The eunuch stroked his cheek. “Or perhaps Cersei would let Ser Ilyn strike off his head. Less risk for the Lannisters that way, though quite an unpleasant surprise for their little friend.”
瓦里斯耸耸肩。“总共有四十来个家伙参加，兰尼斯特家势力又大。场子里乱成那样，马叫个不停，到处有人折手断脚，再加上索罗斯挥着他那把怪里怪气的火焰剑，要真有人不小心碰到国王陛下，你能说那是蓄意谋杀吗？”他起身去拿酒壶，替自己再度斟满。“等生米煮成熟饭，凶手肯定是一副悲痛得难以自已的模样。我连他怎么哭都可以想像。真叫人难过哟。不过那位雍容华贵又慈悲为怀的寡妇一定会同情他，搀扶这可怜虫站起来，然后轻轻一吻给予原谅，到时候咱们好心肠的乔佛里国王除了宽恕他还能怎么办呢。”太监抓抓脸颊。“或者瑟曦会叫伊林爵士把他的头给砍了。这样兰尼斯特家比较保险，只是可怜了他们的同伙。”
Ned felt his anger rise. “You knew of this plot, and yet you did nothing.”
奈德怒火中烧。“你既然知道这起阴谋，为何一声不吭？”
“I command whisperers, not warriors.”
“我的手下是打听消息的探子，不是舞刀弄剑的武士哪。”
“You might have come to me earlier.”
“那至少也该早点跟我说。”
“Oh, yes, I confess it. And you would have rushed straight to the king, yes? And when Robert heard of his peril, what would he have done? I wonder.”
“哦，是嘛？这我承认。不过就算我说了又如何，好让您立刻冲到国王面前向他禀报，是不是？等劳勃听说了这些诡计他又会怎么做呢？我倒是挺好奇。”
Ned considered that. “He would have damned them all, and fought anyway, to show he did not fear them.”
奈德仔细想想。“他会咒他们通通滚蛋，然后照样参赛，让他们知道他不怕。”
Varys spread his hands. “I will make another confession, Lord Eddard. I was curious to see what you would do. Why not come to me? you ask, and I must answer, Why, because I did not trust you, my lord.”
瓦里斯一摊手：“艾德大人，我再向您承认一件事吧。我想看看您听了会有何反应。您问我怎么不事先跟您说，我的回答是：因为我不信任您，大人。”
“You did not trust me?” Ned was frankly astonished.
“你不信任我？”这次奈德真的大吃一惊。
“The Red Keep shelters two sorts of people, Lord Eddard,” Varys said. “Those who are loyal to the realm, and those who are loyal only to themselves. Until this morning, I could not say which you might be … so I waited to see … and now I know, for a certainty.” He smiled a plump tight little smile, and for a moment his private face and public mask were one. “I begin to comprehend why the queen fears you so much. Oh, yes I do.”
“艾德大人，红堡里住了两种人。”瓦里斯道，“一种忠于王国，一种忠于自己。今天早上以前，我不敢判定您属于哪一种……所以我等着瞧……现在我清清楚楚地知道了。”他浅浅一笑，刹那间他私下的表情和在公众场合的表情合而为一。“我渐渐开始了解王后为何这么怕您了。呵，我总算见识到了。”
“You are the one she ought to fear,” Ned said.
“你才是她应该怕的人。”奈德道。
“No. I am what I am. The king makes use of me, but it shames him. A most puissant warrior is our Robert, and such a manly man has little love for sneaks and spies and eunuchs. If a day should come when Cersei whispers, ‘Kill that man,’ Ilyn Payne will snick my head off in a twinkling, and who will mourn poor Varys then? North or south, they sing no songs for spiders.” He reached out and touched Ned with a soft hand. “But you, Lord Stark … I think … no, I know … he would not kill you, not even for his queen, and there may lie our salvation.”
“不，我的身份很清楚。国王利用我，但他为此感到羞耻。咱们劳勃是个雄赳赳气昂昂的大勇士，这种男子气概的人最不屑的就是鸡鸣狗盗和太监之流。要是哪天瑟曦在他耳边嘀咕说‘把他杀了吧’，伊林·派恩转眼间就会砍了我这颗头，到时候谁会替可怜的瓦里斯哀伤呢？天南地北，没有人会为蜘蛛歌唱啊。”他伸出软绵绵的手碰碰奈德。“可史塔克大人您就不一样了……我猜想……不，我很清楚……他决不会杀您，即使是为了王后，这或许便是我们的救赎所在哟。”
It was all too much. For a moment Eddard Stark wanted nothing so much as to return to Winterfell, to the clean simplicity of the north, where the enemies were winter and the wildlings beyond the Wall. “Surely Robert has other loyal friends,” he protested. “His brothers, his—”
这真是太过火了。有好一会儿艾德·史塔克只想回到临冬城，只想要北方的简单明了，那里的敌人就是寒冬和长城外的野人。“劳勃一定还有其他值得信赖的盟友，”他辩驳道，“比如他亲弟弟，还有他——”
“—wife?” Varys finished, with a smile that cut. “His brothers hate the Lannisters, true enough, but hating the queen and loving the king are not quite the same thing, are they? Ser Barristan loves his honor, Grand Maester Pycelle loves his office, and Littlefinger loves Littlefinger.”
“——他老婆？”瓦里斯替他说完，同时露出锐利伤人的微笑。“他两个弟弟是痛恨兰尼斯特没错，但恨王后和爱国王不见得是同一回事，您说是罢？巴利斯坦爵士爱的是他的荣誉，派席尔国师爱惜他得来不易的职位，小指头呢，小指头只爱小指头他自己。”
“The Kingsguard—”
“那御林铁卫——”
“A paper shield,” the eunuch said. “Try not to look so shocked, Lord Stark. Jaime Lannister is himself a Sworn Brother of the White Swords, and we all know what his oath is worth. The days when men like Ryam Redwyne and Prince Aemon the Dragonknight wore the white cloak are gone to dust and song. Of these seven, only Ser Barristan Selmy is made of the true steel, and Selmy is old . Ser Boros and Ser Meryn are the queen’s creatures to the bone, and I have deep suspicions of the others. No, my lord, when the swords come out in earnest, you will be the only true friend Robert Baratheon will have.”
“不过是纸老虎罢了，”太监说，“史塔克大人，您就别一副震惊的模样了。詹姆·兰尼斯特固然是个宣过誓的白骑士，但我们都知道他发的誓有几分斤两。莱安·雷德温和龙骑士伊蒙王子披白袍的日子早过去啦。如今的七铁卫里，只有巴利斯坦·赛尔弥爵士有真本领，然而赛尔弥老矣。柏洛斯爵士和马林爵士都是王后死心塌地的走狗，另外几个我看也好不到哪里去。是的，大人，若真要动刀动枪，您将会是劳勃·拜拉席恩惟一的朋友。”
“Robert must be told,” Ned said. “If what you say is true, if even a part of it is true, the king must hear it for himself.”
“我得让劳勃知道，”奈德道，“假如你所言非虚，即便只有一半属实，国王本人都应该立刻知情。”
“And what proof shall we lay before him? My words against theirs? My little birds against the queen and the Kingslayer, against his brothers and his council, against the Wardens of East and West, against all the might of Casterly Rock? Pray, send for Ser Ilyn directly, it will save us all some time. I know where that road ends.”
“那请问咱们的证据何在？难道要我和他们当面对质？要我的小小鸟儿与王后、弑君者，与国王的亲弟弟和他满朝重臣，东西境守护，以及凯岩城所有的势力为敌？您干脆直接叫伊林爵士来砍我头吧，那样比较省事。我知道说了会有什么下场。”
“Yet if what you say is true, they will only bide their time and make another attempt.”
“若你所言属实，他们只会静待时机，准备再次发难。”
“Indeed they will,” said Varys, “and sooner rather than later, I do fear. You are making them most anxious, Lord Eddard. But my little birds will be listening, and together we may be able to forestall them, you and I.” He rose and pulled up his cowl so his face was hidden once more. “Thank you for the wine. We will speak again. When you see me next at council, be certain to treat me with your accustomed contempt. You should not find it difficult.”
“那还用说，”瓦里斯道，“只怕会很快。艾德大人，您让他们寝食难安哪。但我的小小鸟儿会仔细倾听，咱们俩联手，或许能洞烛先机，就你我两个。”他站起身，拉上斗篷遮住脸。“谢谢您的酒，今天就到此为止，其他以后再谈。下次您在朝廷里见到我，请千万别忘了用上您以前那种轻蔑的态度。我想这应该很容易。”
He was at the door when Ned called, “Varys,” The eunuch turned back. “How did Jon Arryn die?”
他走到门边时，奈德叫道：“瓦里斯，”太监回过头。“琼恩·艾林是怎么死的？”
“I wondered when you would get around to that.”
“我还在想你什么时候才会问起这个。”
“Tell me.”
“告诉我。”
“The tears of Lys, they call it. A rare and costly thing, clear and sweet as water, and it leaves no trace. I begged Lord Arryn to use a taster, in this very room I begged him, but he would not hear of it. Only one who was less than a man would even think of such a thing, he told me.”
“那东西叫‘里斯之泪’，非常罕见，价格高昂。其味道清甜如水，不留一点痕迹。当时我就在这个房间里恳求艾林大人叫人先尝过食物，自己再吃，可他不肯听，还告诉我：只有不配做人的东西才会想到这种事。”
Ned had to know the rest. “Who gave him the poison?”
奈德急切地想知道事情始末。“谁下的毒？”
“Some dear sweet friend who often shared meat and mead with him, no doubt. Oh, but which one? There were many such. Lord Arryn was a kindly, trusting man.” The eunuch sighed. “There was one boy. All he was, he owed Jon Arryn, but when the widow fled to the Eyrie with her household, he stayed in King’s Landing and prospered. It always gladdens my heart to see the young rise in the world.” The whip was in his voice again, every word a stroke. “He must have cut a gallant figure in the tourney, him in his bright new armor, with those crescent moons on his cloak. A pity he died so untimely, before you could talk to him …”
“显然是某个与他很亲近，常和他一起同桌共餐的朋友，噢，但是哪一个呢？可疑的对象太多了。艾林大人是个和蔼可亲又值得信赖的人哪。”太监叹道：“不过倒确有这么个孩子，他的一切都是琼恩·艾林给的，但当艾林的寡妇带着一家大小逃回鹰巢城时，他却选择了留在君临，并很快飞黄腾达。看到年轻人有发展，我总是高兴的。”他的话锋重归锐利，每个字都像挥出的一鞭。“他在比武大会上想必塑造了自己英勇的形象，穿着那身闪亮的新盔甲，还有那件弯月披风。只可惜他死不逢时，您还来不及问他就……”
Ned felt half-poisoned himself. “The squire,” he said. “Ser Hugh.” Wheels within wheels within wheels. Ned’s head was pounding. “Why? Why now? Jon Arryn had been Hand for fourteen years. What was he doing that they had to kill him?”
奈德觉得自己仿佛也给下了毒。“原来是那个侍从，”他说，“修夫爵士。”真是谜中有谜，错综复杂。奈德脑中怦怦作响。“为什么？为什么选在这个时候？琼恩·艾林已经当了十四年的首相，他到底做了什么，逼得他们非杀他不可？”
“Asking questions,” Varys said, slipping out the door.
“他问得太多了。”瓦里斯说着溜出门。
*TYRION
第三十二章 提利昂
A s he stood in the predawn chill watching Chiggen butcher his horse, Tyrion Lannister chalked up one more debt owed the Starks. Steam rose from inside the carcass when the squat sellsword opened the belly with his skinning knife. His hands moved deftly, with never a wasted cut; the work had to be done quickly, before the stink of blood brought shadowcats down from the heights.
提利昂·兰尼斯特站在天光未现的清冷晓色里，看着契根宰杀他的坐骑，暗暗在心里把史塔克家欠他的债再添上一笔。那佣兵用剥皮的刀割开马肚，蒸汽立刻从尸骸里冒出。他两手并用，熟练操作，一刀也不浪费。这事本当迅速完成，以免山上的影子山猫嗅到血腥闻香而来。
“None of us will go hungry tonight,” Bronn said. He was near a shadow himself; bone thin and bone hard, with black eyes and black hair and a stubble of beard.
“今晚咱们都不会挨饿了。”波隆道。他瘦得像骨头一样，也坚毅得像骨头，黑眼黑发，加上短短的胡子，活像是团黑影。
“Some of us may,” Tyrion told him. “I am not fond of eating horse. Particularly my horse.”
“不见得。”提利昂告诉他。“我可对马肉没兴趣，尤其没兴趣吃自己的马。”
“Meat is meat,” Bronn said with a shrug. “The Dothraki like horse more than beef or pork.”
“反正都是肉，”波隆耸肩道，“跟牛肉和猪肉相比，多斯拉克人还更爱马肉呢。”
“Do you take me for a Dothraki?” Tyrion asked sourly. The Dothraki ate horse, in truth; they also left deformed children out for the feral dogs who ran behind their khalasars . Dothraki customs had scant appeal for him.
“你觉得我像多斯拉克人吗？”提利昂冷冷地说。多斯拉克人吃马肉是千真万确的事，他们还放任畸形儿自生自灭，留给跟在卡拉萨后面的野狗吃。他们的习俗委实不怎么吸引他。
Chiggen sliced a thin strip of bloody meat off the carcass and held it up for inspection. “Want a taste, dwarf?”
契根从马尸上割下一薄片血淋淋的肉，举在半空中仔细瞧看。“矮个子，要不要先来一口？”
“My brother Jaime gave me that mare for my twenty-third name day,” Tyrion said in a flat voice.
“这匹母马是我老哥詹姆送给我的二十三岁命名日礼物。”提利昂用平板的口气说。
“Thank him for us, then. If you ever see him again.” Chiggen grinned, showing yellow teeth, and swallowed the raw meat in two bites. “Tastes well bred.”
“那如果你还能活着见到他，代我们道声谢。”契根嘻嘻一笑，露出满嘴黄牙，然后两口就把那块生肉吞下肚去。“这马挺不错。”
“Better if you fry it up with onions,” Bronn put in.
“配洋葱煎着吃更棒。”波隆建议。
Wordlessly, Tyrion limped away. The cold had settled deep in his bones, and his legs were so sore he could scarcely walk. Perhaps his dead mare was the lucky one. He had hours more riding ahead of him, followed by a few mouthfuls of food and a short, cold sleep on hard ground, and then another night of the same, and another, and another, and the gods only knew how it would end. “Damn her,” he muttered as he struggled up the road to rejoin his captors, remembering, “damn her and all the Starks.”
提利昂一言不发，跛着脚走开。他只觉寒意彻骨，两腿酸痛得几乎无法走动。或许他的母马死了反而幸运，因为他自己还有得走咧。每天晚上吃点东西，在坚硬又寒冷的岩地上小睡片刻，便又上路，如此日复一日，只有天上诸神知道何时才是尽头。“去她的，”他喃喃道，一边挣扎着上坡回到绑架他的人身边，一边忆起发生过的事。“姓史塔克的都该死。”
The memory was still bitter. One moment he’d been ordering supper, and an eye blink later he was facing a room of armed men, with Jyck reaching for a sword and the fat innkeep shrieking, “No swords, not here , please, m’lords.”
之前的经过，现在回想起来，依然很不好受。前一秒他才刚点晚餐，一眨眼全屋子的人却都拔刀相向，杰克也准备抽出武器，肥胖的老板娘则尖叫道：“各位大人，求求你们别在这儿动刀动枪。”
Tyrion wrenched down Jyck’s arm hurriedly, before he got them both hacked to pieces. “Where are your courtesies, Jyck? Our good hostess said no swords. Do as she asks.” He forced a smile that must have looked as queasy as it felt. “You’re making a sad mistake, Lady Stark. I had no part in any attack on your son. On my honor—”
提利昂赶在他们两个一起被剁成肉块前抓住杰克的胳膊。“杰克，你的礼貌哪儿去了？咱们好心的老板娘不是说别动刀动枪吗？还不快照办。”他勉强挤出一丝微笑，心想在别人眼里一定难看。“史塔克夫人，我想您一定是弄错了，我跟贵公子的事一点关系也没有。我以我的荣誉起誓——”
“Lannister honor,” was all she said. She held up her hands for all the room to see. “His dagger left these scars. The blade he sent to open my son’s throat.”
“兰尼斯特的荣誉。”她只说了这句，便举起手让全屋子的人看。“这伤疤是他的匕首留下的。他派人用那把刀来割我儿子的喉咙。”
Tyrion felt the anger all around him, thick and smoky, fed by the deep cuts in the Stark woman’s hands. “Kill him,” hissed some drunken slattern from the back, and other voices took up the call, faster than he would have believed. Strangers all, friendly enough only a moment ago, and yet now they cried for his blood like hounds on a trail.
提利昂只感觉周遭人众的怒火上升，被那史塔克女人手上的伤煽动得简直要冒烟。“宰了他。”身后一个喝醉的妓女说，接着其他人也同声附和，速度快得使他不敢相信。大家素昧平生，刚才还颇为友善，如今竟像紧咬不放的嗜血猎犬般要他偿命。
Tyrion spoke up loudly, trying to keep the quaver from his voice. “If Lady Stark believes I have some crime to answer for, I will go with her and answer for it.”
提利昂提高音量，一边努力掩饰声音里的颤抖：“假如史塔克夫人认定我要为某些罪行负责，那我很乐意跟她去好好解释。”
It was the only possible course. Trying to cut their way out of this was a sure invitation to an early grave. A good dozen swords had responded to the Stark woman’s plea for help: the Harrenhal man, the three Brackens, a pair of unsavory sellswords who looked as though they’d kill him as soon as spit, and some fool field hands who doubtless had no idea what they were doing. Against that, what did Tyrion have? A dagger at his belt, and two men. Jyck swung a fair enough sword, but Morrec scarcely counted; he was part groom, part cook, part body servant, and no soldier. As for Yoren, whatever his feelings might have been, the black brothers were sworn to take no part in the quarrels of the realm. Yoren would do nothing.
这是惟一的办法。试图杀出重围无异自掘坟墓。有十来个人应那史塔克女人的请求拔了剑：那名赫伦堡的武士，三个布雷肯家的人，还有两个一副吐口痰就可以把他干掉模样的讨厌佣兵，以及一群根本不知道自己在做什么的庄稼汉。提利昂拿什么对付这些人？杰克的剑使得还不赖，但莫里斯就完全不行，他身兼马夫、厨子和照顾起居的随从三职，原本就不是打仗的料。至于尤伦，无论他自己想法为何，黑衣弟兄可是发过誓，与王国内任何争执都无涉。尤伦只会袖手旁观。
And indeed, the black brother stepped aside silently when the old knight by Catelyn Stark’s side said, “Take their weapons,” and the sellsword Bronn stepped forward to pull the sword from Jyck’s fingers and relieve them all of their daggers. “Good,” the old man said as the tension in the common room ebbed palpably, “excellent.” Tyrion recognized the gruff voice; Winterfell’s master-at-arms, shorn of his whiskers.
果不其然，当凯特琳·史塔克身边的老骑士喝道“没收他们的武器”时，黑衣弟兄便静静地站到一边。佣兵波隆走上前来，从杰克手中拿下剑，并且搜出他们所有的匕首。“很好。”老人说。房间里的紧张气氛明显缓和下来。“干得不错。”提利昂认出那粗硬的声音，是临冬城的教头，只是剃了胡子。
Scarlet-tinged spittle flew from the fat innkeep’s mouth as she begged of Catelyn Stark, “Don’t kill him here!”
胖老板娘向凯特琳·史塔克苦苦哀求，嘴里喷出一串腥红的唾沫：“别在这儿杀他！”
“Don’t kill him anywhere,” Tyrion urged.
“到哪儿都别杀他。”提利昂提议。
“Take him somewheres else, no blood here, m’lady, I wants no high lordlin’s quarrels.”
“夫人，要杀也请您到别的地方杀，别把我这儿弄得到处是血，我不想惹上官家的麻烦事儿啊。”
“We are taking him back to Winterfell,” she said, and Tyrion thought, Well, perhaps … By then he’d had a moment to glance over the room and get a better idea of the situation. He was not altogether displeased by what he saw. Oh, the Stark woman had been clever, no doubt of it. Force them to make a public affirmation of the oaths sworn her father by the lords they served, and then call on them for succor, and her a woman, yes, that was sweet. Yet her success was not as complete as she might have liked. There were close to fifty in the common room by his rough count. Catelyn Stark’s plea had roused a bare dozen; the others looked confused, or frightened, or sullen. Only two of the Freys had stirred, Tyrion noted, and they’d sat back down quick enough when their captain failed to move. He might have smiled if he’d dared.
“我们要把他带回临冬城去。”她说，提利昂听了心想：要是这样的话，或许……当时他已趁短暂余暇环顾四周，对当下情形更有掌握。眼前所见不至于让他绝望。噢，那史塔克女人反应倒是机敏，这无庸置疑。她先逼他们公开承认自家主子对她父亲的誓约，然后再请他们拔刀相助，何况她又是区区一个弱女子。没错，这招厉害。然而她也没有赢得太彻底。据他约略估算，饭厅里将近有五十个人。凯特琳·史塔克不过说动了十来个，其他人有的困惑，有的害怕，还有的冷漠。提利昂注意到，佛雷家那群人只有两个准备响应，而他们眼看带头的没动静，便又很快坐回去了。若不是不敢，否则他还真想偷笑。
“Winterfell it is, then,” he said instead. That was a long ride, as he could well attest, having just ridden it the other way. So many things could happen along the way. “My father will wonder what has become of me,” he added, catching the eye of the swordsman who’d offered to yield up his room. “He’ll pay a handsome reward to any man who brings him word of what happened here today.” Lord Tywin would do no such thing, of course, but Tyrion would make up for it if he won free.
“临冬城，去就去。”他说。这会是趟漫长的旅途，他自己刚从反方向走来，有着切身的体会。谁也说不准途中会有什么变数。“不过我不告而别，我老爸可能会担心我，”他补充道，一边看着刚才那个自愿把房间让给他的流浪剑客。“谁把今天发生的事告诉他，他定将重重赏赐。”泰温公爵当然不会如此，提利昂打算等自己脱身后再想办法补偿。
Ser Rodrik glanced at his lady, his look worried, as well it might be. “His men come with him,” the old knight announced. “And we’ll thank the rest of you to stay quiet about what you’ve seen here.”
罗德利克爵士忧心忡忡地看看他的女主人，这老家伙也没什么高招。“他的人跟他一起走。”老骑士宣布，“刚才发生的事，还请诸位不要张扬。”
It was all Tyrion could do not to laugh. Quiet? The old fool. Unless he took the whole inn, the word would begin to spread the instant they were gone. The freerider with the gold coin in his pocket would fly to Casterly Rock like an arrow. If not him, then someone else. Yoren would carry the story south. That fool singer might make a lay of it. The Freys would report back to their lord, and the gods only knew what he might do. Lord Walder Frey might be sworn to Riverrun, but he was a cautious man who had lived a long time by making certain he was always on the winning side. At the very least he would send his birds winging south to King’s Landing, and he might well dare more than that.
提利昂好容易才忍住笑。不要张扬？老糊涂蛋。除非把整间旅店里的人都抓起来，否则前脚刚踏出门，后脚消息就会散播开去。那个口袋里装了金币的流浪武士一定会心急火燎地飞速赶往凯岩城通风报信，就算他没去，别人也一定会去。尤伦将把消息带往南方，而那个愚蠢的歌手说不定还会为此写首歌谣。佛雷家的手下会回报他们主子，他下一步会怎么做，只有天上诸神知道。瓦德·佛雷男爵虽然是奔流城的臣属，但他活了这么大把年纪，靠的就是小心谨慎，永远站在赢家那边。至少他会派鸟儿送信息到君临，很可能还不只这样。
Catelyn Stark wasted no time. “We must ride at once. We’ll want fresh mounts, and provisions for the road. You men, know that you have the eternal gratitude of House Stark. If any of you choose to help us guard our captives and get them safe to Winterfell, I promise you shall be well rewarded.” That was all it took; the fools came rushing forward. Tyrion studied their faces; they would indeed be well rewarded, he vowed to himself, but perhaps not quite as they imagined.
凯特琳·史塔克一点时间也没浪费。“我们马上动身，我们需要精力充足的马，还有路上必须的粮食。你们几位，史塔克家族永远感激你们。假如你们愿意协助我们押送犯人前往临冬城，我保证有重赏。”那些个蠢蛋就等这句话，听了立刻一拥而上。提利昂一个接一个地审视他们的脸庞：你们的确会得到重赏，他发誓，只怕不是你们想像的那种。
Yet even as they were bundling him outside, saddling the horses in the rain, and tying his hands with a length of coarse rope, Tyrion Lannister was not truly afraid. They would never get him to Winterfell, he would have given odds on that. Riders would be after them within the day, birds would take wing, and surely one of the river lords would want to curry favor with his father enough to take a hand. Tyrion was congratulating himself on his subtlety when someone pulled a hood down over his eyes and lifted him up onto a saddle.
他们立刻来到屋外，冒着雨给马备鞍。他们用粗绳绑住提利昂的手，他却不怎么害怕。他敢打赌，他们绝对无法把他押回临冬城，不出一天，定会有人骑马追来，这有什么好奇怪呢？鸟儿会送出讯息，届时必有河间地区的领主插手，借机讨好他老爸。提利昂正对自己的精打细算感到得意，就被人盖上兜帽，遮住眼睛，放上马鞍。
They set out through the rain at a hard gallop, and before long Tyrion’s thighs were cramped and aching and his butt throbbed with pain. Even when they were safely away from the inn, and Catelyn Stark slowed them to a trot, it was a miserable pounding journey over rough ground, made worse by his blindness. Every twist and turn put him in danger of falling off his horse. The hood muffled sound, so he could not make out what was being said around him, and the rain soaked through the cloth and made it cling to his face, until even breathing was a struggle. The rope chafed his wrists raw and seemed to grow tighter as the night wore on. I was about to settle down to a warm fire and a roast fowl, and that wretched singer had to open his mouth , he thought mournfully. The wretched singer had come along with them. “There is a great song to be made from this, and I’m the one to make it,” he told Catelyn Stark when he announced his intention of riding with them to see how the “splendid adventure” turned out. Tyrion wondered whether the boy would think the adventure quite so splendid once the Lannister riders caught up with them.
他们快马加鞭地冒雨出发，没过多久提利昂便已两腿酸疼，屁股也磨得难受。虽然安然远离旅店之后，凯特琳·史塔克便放慢速度，但这仍旧是一趟崎岖难行的艰苦旅程，蒙住眼睛更是雪上加霜。每次转弯他都有坠马的危险。透过头套听见的声音很模糊，所以他不清楚身边的人在说什么。细雨浸湿布料，头套紧贴脸庞，后来连呼吸都有困难。粗绳磨破他的手腕，随着夜色渐深，似乎越来越紧。他本来是要好好坐下，在火炉边取暖，享用刚烤出来的鸟肉的，只怪那该死的歌手偏偏要张开他的乌鸦嘴，他可怜兮兮地想。这该死的歌手竟然也在队伍里。“这件事值得大加传颂，我当然义不容辞啰。”当他宣布和他们一道，好瞧瞧这趟“精彩的冒险”会有什么结果时，他对凯特琳·史塔克这么说。提利昂不禁心想：等兰尼斯特家的骑士追上他们，你小子再来瞧瞧这趟冒险精不精彩。
The rain had finally stopped and dawn light was seeping through the wet cloth over his eyes when Catelyn Stark gave the command to dismount. Rough hands pulled him down from his horse, untied his wrists, and yanked the hood off his head. When he saw the narrow stony road, the foothills rising high and wild all around them, and the jagged snowcapped peaks on the distant horizon, all the hope went out of him in a rush. “This is the high road,” he gasped, looking at Lady Stark with accusation. “The eastern road. You said we were riding for Winterfell!”
凯特琳·史塔克下令暂时休息时，雨总算停了，曙光从湿布间的缝隙渗进眼帘。他被人粗手粗脚地拉下马，解开腕上的粗绳，拉掉头罩。当他看见眼前狭窄的石头路，四周愈见陡峭险恶的丘陵地势，以及远方地平线上呈锯齿状的覆雪峰峦，心中一切希望顿时化为乌有。“这是上坡路，”他用控诉的神情看着史塔克夫人，失声道，“是朝东边的路。你说我们要去临冬城！”
Catelyn Stark favored him with the faintest of smiles. “Often and loudly,” she agreed. “No doubt your friends will ride that way when they come after us. I wish them good speed.”
凯特琳·史塔克带着轻浅的笑意看着他。“说了很多次，而且很大声。”她同意，“想必你的朋友们会打那边追赶我们。祝他们一路顺风。”
Even now, long days later, the memory filled him with a bitter rage. All his life Tyrion had prided himself on his cunning, the only gift the gods had seen fit to give him, and yet this seven-times-damned she-wolf Catelyn Stark had outwitted him at every turn. The knowledge was more galling than the bare fact of his abduction.
即使过了这么些天，现在回想起来，他还是恼怒不已。提利昂这辈子向来以机敏自豪，因为那是天上诸神赐给他的惟一礼物，没想到这该死七次的母狼凯特琳·史塔克却魔高一丈，想到自己每一着棋都被她识破，简直比他被绑架这件事还叫他难过。
They stopped only as long as it took to feed and water the horses, and then they were off again. This time Tyrion was spared the hood. After the second night they no longer bound his hands, and once they had gained the heights they scarcely bothered to guard him at all. It seemed they did not fear his escape. And why should they? Up here the land was harsh and wild, and the high road little more than a stony track. If he did run, how far could he hope to go, alone and without provisions? The shadowcats would make a morsel of him, and the clans that dwelt in the mountain fastnesses were brigands and murderers who bowed to no law but the sword.
他们只停下来让马儿吃草喝水，便又匆匆上路。这次他们放过了提利昂，没再给他戴上头套，两天后更松开绑住他双手的绳子，等进入高山区，更是连派人看守都免了。他们似乎不怕他逃走，有什么好怕的？这里地势崎岖险恶，所谓的大道不过是条石头小径。就算他真的脱逃成功，在没有粮食又只身一人的情况下，能跑多远？影子山猫会拿他当点心，而蛰居山间的氏族部落更是些杀人越货的法外凶徒，惟有刀剑能叫他们臣服。
Yet still the Stark woman drove them forward relentlessly. He knew where they were bound. He had known it since the moment they pulled off his hood. These mountains were the domain of House Arryn, and the late Hand’s widow was a Tully, Catelyn Stark’s sister … and no friend to the Lannisters. Tyrion had known the Lady Lysa slightly during her years at King’s Landing, and did not look forward to renewing the acquaintance.
虽然如此，史塔克家的女人还是无情地催促他们赶路。此行目的地为何，早在头套被摘下那一刻，他便一清二楚。此间山区是艾林家族的领地，而前任首相的遗孀也是徒利家人，正是凯特琳·史塔克的妹妹……换言之，对兰尼斯特家无甚好感。在莱莎夫人待在君临的那些年里，提利昂跟她算是点头之交，此时此刻实在不想再续前缘。
His captors were clustered around a stream a short ways down the high road. The horses had drunk their fill of the icy cold water, and were grazing on clumps of brown grass that grew from clefts in the rock. Jyck and Morrec huddled close, sullen and miserable. Mohor stood over them, leaning on his spear and wearing a rounded iron cap that made him look as if he had a bowl on his head. Nearby, Marillion the singer sat oiling his woodharp, complaining of what the damp was doing to his strings.
绑架他的人们聚集在离山坡不远的小溪边。马儿们喝饱了冰冷的山泉，正啃食着从岩缝里长出的褐色杂草。杰克和莫里斯可怜兮兮地窝在一起，摩霍尔拄着长枪站在他们旁边，头戴一顶圆形铁盔，活像扣了个大碗。马瑞里安坐在他身边，正帮木头竖琴上油，一边抱怨湿气对琴弦有害。
“We must have some rest, my lady,” the hedge knight Ser Willis Wode was saying to Catelyn Stark as Tyrion approached. He was Lady Whent’s man, stiff-necked and stolid, and the first to rise to aid Catelyn Stark back at the inn.
“夫人，我们真的需要休息。”提利昂走近时，雇佣骑士维里·渥德正对凯特琳·史塔克说话。他是河安伯爵夫人的手下，看来一副硬汉模样，麻木无情，却是旅店里头一个响应凯特琳·史塔克的人。
“Ser Willis speaks truly, my lady,” Ser Rodrik said. “This is the third horse we have lost—”
“夫人，维里爵士说得对，”罗德利克爵士道，“这已经是我们损失的第三匹马了——”
“We will lose more than horses if we’re overtaken by the Lannisters,” she reminded them. Her face was windburnt and gaunt, but it had lost none of its determination.
“如果我们被兰尼斯特家的手下追上，损失的可就不只是马啦。”她提醒他们。她的脸饱经风吹雨打，面容憔悴，但坚毅果决丝毫不减。
“Small chance of that here,” Tyrion put in.
“在这里不太可能。”提利昂插嘴。
“The lady did not ask your views, dwarf,” snapped Kurleket, a great fat oaf with short-cropped hair and a pig’s face. He was one of the Brackens, a man-at-arms in the service of Lord Jonos. Tyrion had made a special effort to learn all their names, so he might thank them later for their tender treatment of him. A Lannister always paid his debts. Kurleket would learn that someday, as would his friends Lharys and Mohor, and the good Ser Willis, and the sellswords Bronn and Chiggen. He planned an especially sharp lesson for Marillion, him of the woodharp and the sweet tenor voice, who was struggling so manfully to rhyme imp with gimp and limp so he could make a song of this outrage.
“侏儒，夫人可没问你意见。”库雷凯特斥道。他是个头脑简单的胖子，一头短发，生了张猪脸，是布雷肯家那几人之一，在裘诺斯伯爵手下当兵。为了记住这些名字，提利昂特别下过功夫，以便将来好好感谢他们的礼遇。兰尼斯特有债必还，库雷凯特总有一天会知道这句话可不是说着玩的，他的朋友拉利斯和摩霍尔，好心的维里爵士，以及那两个佣兵波隆和契根也一样。至于马瑞里安，这个成天拨弄竖琴，有副甜腻的高嗓音，正努力地要把“小恶魔”和“脚跛”、“走不动”等字押韵，好为这件事写首歌的浑小子，他打算特别给他点苦头尝尝。
“Let him speak,” Lady Stark commanded.
“让他说罢。”史塔克夫人下令。
Tyrion Lannister seated himself on a rock. “By now our pursuit is likely racing across the Neck, chasing your lie up the kingsroad … assuming there is a pursuit, which is by no means certain. Oh, no doubt the word has reached my father … but my father does not love me overmuch, and I am not at all sure that he will bother to bestir himself.” It was only half a lie; Lord Tywin Lannister cared not a fig for his deformed son, but he tolerated no slights on the honor of his House. “This is a cruel land, Lady Stark. You’ll find no succor until you reach the Vale, and each mount you lose burdens the others all the more. Worse, you risk losing me . I am small, and not strong, and if I die, then what’s the point?” That was no lie at all; Tyrion did not know how much longer he could endure this pace.
提利昂·兰尼斯特找了块石头坐下。“现在我们的追兵大概已经赶到颈泽，按照您撒的谎沿国王大道一路追过去了……当然，这是假设真的有追兵，事实上有没有还不知道。喔，家父毫无疑问已经听说了消息……但家父对我不甚疼爱，所以我说不准他是否大动干戈。”这不完全是说谎，泰温·兰尼斯特公爵固然不管他畸形儿子死活，但他绝对无法忍受家族荣誉受损。“史塔克夫人，这是个残酷的地方，我相信在你们抵达艾林谷以前都不会有追兵赶来，但您每损失一匹马，便是加重其他人的负担。更糟的是，您还有可能连我的命也保不住。我个子小，身体又不强壮，若是死了，这岂不是白跑一趟？”这句可完全属实，提利昂真不知道如此折磨下去，他还能撑多久。
“It might be said that your death is the point, Lannister,” Catelyn Stark replied.
“兰尼斯特，跑这一趟的目的就是要你死。”凯特琳·史塔克答道。
“I think not,” Tyrion said. “If you wanted me dead, you had only to say the word, and one of these staunch friends of yours would gladly have given me a red smile.” He looked at Kurleket, but the man was too dim to taste the mockery.
“我不这样想，”提利昂道，“您真要我死，只消说一声，您这群忠心耿耿的朋友立刻会自告奋勇上来取我性命。”他看看库雷凯特，但那家伙智能太低，听不出其中的讥讽。
“The Starks do not murder men in their beds.”
“史塔克家的人不会乘人之危。”
“Nor do I,” he said. “I tell you again, I had no part in the attempt to kill your son.”
“我也不会。”他说：“我再跟您说一遍，意图谋害贵公子的事与我毫无瓜葛。”
“The assassin was armed with your dagger.”
“刺客手里拿的是你的匕首。”
Tyrion felt the heat rise in him. “It was not my dagger,” he insisted. “How many times must I swear to that? Lady Stark, whatever you may believe of me, I am not a stupid man. Only a fool would arm a common footpad with his own blade.”
提利昂胸中的怒火直往上冒。“那不是我的东西。”他强调，“你到底要我发多少次誓才肯相信？史塔克夫人，无论你信不信，总之我不是笨蛋，把自己的武器交给普通小贼用，这种事只有笨蛋才干得出来。”
Just for a moment, he thought he saw a flicker of doubt in her eyes, but what she said was, “Why would Petyr lie to me?”
一时间他似乎看到怀疑闪过她眼底，但她却说：“培提尔为什么要对我撒谎？”
“Why does a bear shit in the woods?” he demanded. “Because it is his nature. Lying comes as easily as breathing to a man like Littlefinger. You ought to know that, you of all people.”
“狗熊为什么要在森林里拉屎？”他质问，“那是天性。对小指头那种人来说，撒谎跟呼吸一样自然。不说别人，你应该特别了解才对。”
She took a step toward him, her face tight. “And what does that mean, Lannister?”
她向他走近一步，绷紧了脸。“你什么意思，兰尼斯特？”
Tyrion cocked his head. “Why, every man at court has heard him tell how he took your maidenhead, my lady.”
提利昂昂头道：“这个嘛，我说夫人，您是怎么被他开苞的，这事宫里每个人都听他说过哪。”
“That is a lie!” Catelyn Stark said.
“根本没这回事！”凯特琳·史塔克怒道。
“Oh, wicked little imp,” Marillion said, shocked.
“哎，你这小恶魔真是坏到骨子里去了。”马瑞里安显然吓了一跳。
Kurleket drew his dirk, a vicious piece of black iron. “At your word, m’lady, I’ll toss his lying tongue at your feet.” His pig eyes were wet with excitement at the prospect.
库雷凯特抽出他那黑铁打造的锋利短刀。“夫人，您点个头，我就把这家伙的烂舌头割下来。”一想到割舌头的情景，他那对猪眼睛便兴奋地睁得老大。
Catelyn Stark stared at Tyrion with a coldness on her face such as he had never seen. “Petyr Baelish loved me once. He was only a boy. His passion was a tragedy for all of us, but it was real, and pure, and nothing to be made mock of. He wanted my hand. That is the truth of the matter. You are truly an evil man, Lannister.”
凯特琳·史塔克用一种提利昂从未见过的冷酷神情瞪着他。“培提尔·贝里席曾经爱过我。当时他还只是个孩子。他的爱虽然对我们彼此都是个错误，但却是千真万确、纯洁无瑕的小儿女之情，不是拿给你寻开心的。他想牵我的手、娶我为妻，这才是事情的真相。兰尼斯特，你真是个无可救药的恶魔。”
“And you are truly a fool, Lady Stark. Littlefinger has never loved anyone but Littlefinger, and I promise you that it is not your hand that he boasts of, it’s those ripe breasts of yours, and that sweet mouth, and the heat between your legs.”
“那你就是无可救药的笨蛋了，史塔克夫人。小指头除了他自己，从没爱过别人。我敢跟您保证，他对我们吹嘘的绝不是您那双纤纤玉手，而是您那对胀鼓鼓的乳房，那张娇艳欲滴的樱桃小嘴，还有您两腿间那团热呼呼的火。”
Kurleket grabbed a handful of hair and yanked his head back in a hard jerk, baring his throat. Tyrion felt the cold kiss of steel beneath his chin. “Shall I bleed him, my lady?”
库雷凯特猛地一把攫住他头发，使劲将头往后一拉，露出他的喉咙。提利昂感觉出刀锋冰冷地吻着下巴。“夫人，要不我给他放点血？”
“Kill me and the truth dies with me,” Tyrion gasped.
“杀了我，真相也就永远埋没。”提利昂喘息着说。
“Let him talk,” Catelyn Stark commanded.
“让他说完。”凯特琳·史塔克下令。
Kurleket let go of Tyrion’s hair, reluctantly.
库雷凯特很不情愿地放手。
Tyrion took a deep breath. “How did Littlefinger tell you I came by this dagger of his? Answer me that.”
提利昂深吸一口气。“根据小指头的说法，我是怎么拿到他匕首的？告诉我。”
“You won it from him in a wager, during the tourney on Prince Joffrey’s name day.”
“你在乔佛里王子命名日那天的比武大会上，打赌赢了他。”
“When my brother Jaime was unhorsed by the Knight of Flowers, that was his story, no?”
“是在家兄詹姆被百花骑士刺下马的时候。这就是他的故事，对不对？”
“It was,” she admitted. A line creased her brow.
“是的。”她坦承。她的眉间闪过一抹疑虑。
“Riders!”
“骑兵！”
The shriek came from the wind-carved ridge above them. Ser Rodrik had sent Lharys scrambling up the rock face to watch the road while they took their rest.
尖叫声自上方的风蚀山脊间传来。休息之前，罗德利克爵士派拉利斯爬上去守望。
For a long second, no one moved. Catelyn Stark was the first to react. “Ser Rodrik, Ser Willis, to horse,” she shouted. “Get the other mounts behind us. Mohor, guard the prisoners—”
一时之间大家全愣住了。凯特琳·史塔克是第一个采取行动的人。“罗德利克爵士，维里爵士，请你们赶快上马备战，”她喊道，“把其他马牵到后面。摩霍尔，你负责看守犯人……”
“Arm us!” Tyrion sprang to his feet and seized her by the arm. “You will need every sword.”
“给我们武器！”提利昂一跃起身，抓住她的手，“多一个人就多一分力量。”
She knew he was right, Tyrion could see it. The mountain clans cared nothing for the enmities of the great houses; they would slaughter Stark and Lannister with equal fervor, as they slaughtered each other. They might spare Catelyn herself; she was still young enough to bear sons. Still, she hesitated.
提利昂看得出她知道他说得对，高山氏族部落才不管贵族间的纠葛——不管杀史塔克还是兰尼斯特家，都会像自相残杀一样毫不留情。他们或许只会放过凯特琳，因为她还年轻，可以替他们传宗接代。明知如此，她仍旧犹豫不决。
“I hear them!” Ser Rodrik called out. Tyrion turned his head to listen, and there it was: hoofbeats, a dozen horses or more, coming nearer. Suddenly everyone was moving, reaching for weapons, running to their mounts.
“我听见他们了！”罗德利克爵士大喊。提利昂侧耳倾听，果然听到十来匹马的蹄声快速逼近。突然间大家都行动起来，有的抽出武器，有的朝坐骑跑去。
Pebbles rained down around them as Lharys came springing and sliding down the ridge. He landed breathless in front of Catelyn Stark, an ungainly-looking man with wild tufts of rust-colored hair sticking out from under a conical steel cap. “Twenty men, maybe twenty-five,” he said, breathless. “Milk Snakes or Moon Brothers, by my guess. They must have eyes out, m’lady … hidden watchers … they know we’re here.”
拉利斯连跑带跳地翻下山脊，碎石如雨般朝他们撒来。他上气不接下气地跳到凯特琳·史塔克面前。他生得很丑，满头铁锈色的乱发从锥形钢盔下方爆出。“我看到二十个，可能有二十五个，”他气喘吁吁地说，“我猜是白蛇部或月人部。夫人，路上一定有斥候……躲起来观察……他们早发现了我们。”
Ser Rodrik Cassel was already ahorse, a longsword in hand. Mohor crouched behind a boulder, both hands on his iron-tipped spear, a dagger between his teeth. “You, singer,” Ser Willis Wode called out. “Help me with this breastplate.” Marillion sat frozen, clutching his woodharp, his face as pale as milk, but Tyrion’s man Morrec bounded quickly to his feet and moved to help the knight with his armor.
罗德利克·凯索爵士已经上马，手握长剑。摩霍尔蹲伏在一块巨石后，双手握住他的铁尖长矛，牙间咬着一把短刀。“喂，唱歌的，”维里·渥德爵士叫道，“过来帮我穿盔甲。”马瑞里安僵在原地，抱紧他的木头竖琴，脸色像牛奶一般苍白。结果是提利昂的仆人莫里斯跳起来，上前帮骑士穿上护甲。
Tyrion kept his grip on Catelyn Stark. “You have no choice,” he told her. “Three of us, and a fourth man wasted guarding us … four men can be the difference between life and death up here.”
提利昂抓着凯特琳·史塔克不放。“你别无选择，”他告诉她，“我们有三个，你还得浪费第四个人作看守……眼下，四个人足以决定全体生死。”
“Give me your word that you will put down your swords again after the fight is done.”
“向我保证事后你会归还武器。”
“My word?” The hoofbeats were louder now. Tyrion grinned crookedly. “Oh, that you have, my lady … on my honor as a Lannister.”
“你要我的保证？”马蹄声越来越大，提利昂嘻嘻笑道，“唉，那有什么问题，夫人，我以兰尼斯特的荣誉为名……向你保证。”
For a moment he thought she would spit at him, but instead she snapped, “Arm them,” and as quick as that she was pulling away. Ser Rodrik tossed Jyck his sword and scabbard, and wheeled to meet the foe. Morrec helped himself to a bow and quiver, and went to one knee beside the road. He was a better archer than swordsman. And Bronn rode up to offer Tyrion a double-bladed axe.
他原以为她会朝自己吐口水，结果她只丢下一句：“把武器给他们，”便快步离开。罗德利克爵士把杰克的武器连剑带鞘丢还给他，然后调转马头投入战斗。莫里斯自己弄了张弓和一筒箭，单膝跪在路上。他射箭比用剑在行多了。波隆则骑马过来，给了提利昂一把双刃斧。
“I have never fought with an axe.” The weapon felt awkward and unfamiliar in his hands. It had a short haft, a heavy head, a nasty spike on top.
“我没用过斧头。”武器在手的感觉怪异而陌生。它的握柄很短，斧刃则极重，前端还有根吓人的尖钉。
“Pretend you’re splitting logs,” Bronn said, drawing his longsword from the scabbard across his back. He spat, and trotted off to form up beside Chiggen and Ser Rodrik. Ser Willis mounted up to join them, fumbling with his helmet, a metal pot with a thin slit for his eyes and a long black silk plume.
“就当是劈柴。”波隆边说边从背上的鞘里抽出长剑。他啐了口唾沫，飞奔至契根和罗德利克爵士旁边。维里爵士也上马加入他们，一边拨弄着他那顶开了条细眼缝，上面插了根黑丝羽毛的金属锅形头盔。
“Logs don’t bleed,” Tyrion said to no one in particular. He felt naked without armor. He looked around for a rock and ran over to where Marillion was hiding. “Move over.”
“木头可不会流血。”提利昂自言自语。没有盔甲，他觉得自己好像没穿衣服。他环顾四周，想找块石头，最后跑到马瑞里安躲着的地方。“靠过去一点。”
“Go away!” the boy screamed back at him. “I’m a singer, I want no part of this fight!”
“走开！”男孩朝他尖叫，“我是唱歌的，打打杀杀跟我无关！”
“What, lost your taste for adventure?” Tyrion kicked at the youth until he slid over, and not a moment too soon. A heartbeat later, the riders were on them.
“怎么，不想冒险啦？”提利昂抬脚踢他，直到他不敢拖延，乖乖爬开。一个心跳的间隔之后，敌人便骑马冲过来了。
There were no heralds, no banners, no horns nor drums, only the twang of bowstrings as Morrec and Lharys let fly, and suddenly the clansmen came thundering out of the dawn, lean dark men in boiled leather and mismatched armor, faces hidden behind barred half helms. In gloved hands were clutched all manner of weapons: longswords and lances and sharpened scythes, spiked clubs and daggers and heavy iron mauls. At their head rode a big man in a striped shadowskin cloak, armed with a two-handed greatsword.
这场战斗没有传令官，没有旗帜，没有号角吹响，也没有鼓声隆隆，只听见莫里斯和拉利斯放箭时的弓弦砰然声，转眼间原住民的铁蹄便踏破黎明，轰然而至。他们个个皮肤黝黑，身形精瘦，穿着硬皮革和抢来的不合身的护甲，面容隐藏在半罩头盔里。他们戴着手套，手里拿着形形色色的武器，有老朽的长剑、长枪，磨利的镰刀，还有狼牙棒、匕首和重铁锤。骑在最前面的人穿了一件花斑影子山猫皮做成的披风，握着一把双手巨剑。
Ser Rodrik shouted “Winterfell!” and rode to meet him, with Bronn and Chiggen beside him, screaming some wordless battle cry. Ser Willis Wode followed, swinging a spiked morningstar around his head. “Harrenhal! Harrenhal!” he sang. Tyrion felt a sudden urge to leap up, brandish his axe, and boom out, “Casterly Rock!” but the insanity passed quickly and he crouched down lower.
罗德利克爵士大喊一声：“临冬城万岁！”然后迎上前去，波隆和契根也一左一右冲杀出去，嘴里喊着含混不清的口号。维里爵士跟在后面，头上挥舞着一把钉刺流星锤。“赫伦堡万岁！赫伦堡万岁！”他叫道。提利昂突然间也有股冲动，想跳起来挥动斧头，然后大叫：“凯岩城万岁！”但他很快打消了这疯狂的念头，反而蹲得更低。
He heard the screams of frightened horses and the crash of metal on metal. Chiggen’s sword raked across the naked face of a mailed rider, and Bronn plunged through the clansmen like a whirlwind, cutting down foes right and left. Ser Rodrik hammered at the big man in the shadowskin cloak, their horses dancing round each other as they traded blow for blow. Jyck vaulted onto a horse and galloped bareback into the fray. Tyrion saw an arrow sprout from the throat of the man in the shadowskin cloak. When he opened his mouth to scream, only blood came out. By the time he fell, Ser Rodrik was fighting someone else.
他听见马儿受惊的尖叫，以及金属碰撞的声音。契根的剑削开一个人的脸，那人穿了铠甲，但没戴头盔。波隆则像一阵龙卷风般冲入敌阵，左劈右砍，切菜似地掀倒对手。罗德利克爵士则径自朝那个披影子山猫皮披风的大汉攻去，两匹马相互绕圈，两人你来我往。杰克跳上一匹马，连马鞍都没用就飞奔进乱军之中。提利昂看见一枝利箭自那披山猫披风的人喉头刺出，他张嘴欲喊，却只有鲜血涌出。等他倒地，罗德利克爵士已找到了新对手。
Suddenly Marillion shrieked, covering his head with his woodharp as a horse leapt over their rock. Tyrion scrambled to his feet as the rider turned to come back at them, hefting a spiked maul. Tyrion swung his axe with both hands. The blade caught the charging horse in the throat with a meaty thunk , angling upward, and Tyrion almost lost his grip as the animal screamed and collapsed. He managed to wrench the axe free and lurch clumsily out of the way. Marillion was less fortunate. Horse and rider crashed to the ground in a tangle on top of the singer. Tyrion danced back in while the brigand’s leg was still pinned beneath his fallen mount, and buried the axe in the man’s neck, just above the shoulder blades.
马瑞里安忽然尖叫起来，拿他的木头竖琴遮住头，只见一匹马自他们躲藏的岩石上方跳过。提利昂见状赶忙起身，来人调转马头，举起一柄带刺的大锤，回来收拾他们。提利昂双手握斧挥出，正砍中冲刺的马的喉咙，铮地发出结实的一声。马儿惨叫倒地，提利昂的武器险些脱手。他好不容易即时拔出斧头，踉跄地闪开。马瑞里安可没这么好运，对方连人带马朝他摔去，一团砸在他身上。趁着这匪徒的腿还被马压住，提利昂溜过去补上一斧，恰好砍在肩胛骨上方的脖子处。
As he struggled to yank the blade loose, he heard Marillion moaning under the bodies. “Someone help me,” the singer gasped. “Gods have mercy, I’m bleeding.”
正当他奋力拔出斧头，他听见埋在尸体下面的马瑞里安发出的呻吟。“谁来救救我，”歌手喘着气说，“天上诸神可怜我，我要流血而死了。”
“I believe that’s horse blood,” Tyrion said. The singer’s hand came crawling out from beneath the dead animal, scrabbling in the dirt like a spider with five legs. Tyrion put his heel on the grasping fingers and felt a satisfying crunch. “Close your eyes and pretend you’re dead,” he advised the singer before he hefted the axe and turned away.
“我相信那是马的血。”提利昂道。吟游诗人的手从死马底下伸出来，在泥地里乱抠，活像只五条脚的蜘蛛。提利昂伸出脚跟狠踩在狂抓的手指上，听到一声令人满意的喀啦响。“闭上眼睛，假装你已经死了吧。”他如此建议歌手，然后抽出斧头，转身走开。
After that, things ran together. The dawn was full of shouts and screams and heavy with the scent of blood, and the world had turned to chaos. Arrows hissed past his ear and clattered off the rocks. He saw Bronn unhorsed, fighting with a sword in each hand. Tyrion kept on the fringes of the fight, sliding from rock to rock and darting out of the shadows to hew at the legs of passing horses. He found a wounded clansman and left him dead, helping himself to the man’s halfhelm. It fit too snugly, but Tyrion was glad of any protection at all. Jyck was cut down from behind while he sliced at a man in front of him, and later Tyrion stumbled over Kurleket’s body. The pig face had been smashed in with a mace, but Tyrion recognized the dirk as he plucked it from the man’s dead fingers. He was sliding it through his belt when he heard a woman’s scream.
在那之后，战场的情形乱成一团。这个清晨充满了呐喊和尖叫，空气中弥漫着血腥，世界一片混沌。利箭咻咻飞过他耳际，在石头上弹开。他看到波隆被打下马，两手各持一剑继续作战。提利昂在战场边缘游走，穿梭于岩石间，偶尔从躲藏的阴影里跳出来砍路过马匹的腿。他找到一个负伤的原住民，了结了他，并把他的半罩头盔拿来穿戴。头盔太紧，但只要能提供保护，提利昂就很高兴。杰克正和面前的敌人缠斗，却被人从后面捅了一刀。不一会儿提利昂又绊在了库雷凯特的尸体上，那张猪脸被钉头锤打得稀烂，但提利昂认得他手中的短刀，他把它从死人的指间拔出。他正要插进腰带时，听到了女人的尖叫。
Catelyn Stark was trapped against the stone face of the mountain with three men around her, one still mounted and the other two on foot. She had a dagger clutched awkwardly in her maimed hands, but her back was to the rock now and they had penned her on three sides. Let them have the bitch , Tyrion thought, and welcome to her , yet somehow he was moving. He caught the first man in the back of the knee before they even knew he was there, and the heavy axehead split flesh and bone like rotten wood. Logs that bleed , Tyrion thought inanely as the second man came for him. Tyrion ducked under his sword, lashed out with the axe, the man reeled backward … and Catelyn Stark stepped up behind him and opened his throat. The horseman remembered an urgent engagement elsewhere and galloped off suddenly.
凯特琳·史塔克被三个人围在山壁边，其中一个骑马，另外两个则是徒步。她受伤的手姿势怪异地握着一把匕首，但她已经退到山壁边缘，被三面团团包围。这婊子就给他们吧，提利昂心想，爱怎么搞随他们去，但不知怎么，他却采取了行动。他在对方发觉之前砍中一个人的膝盖后方，沉重的斧刃劈开血肉和骨头，好像劈的不过是腐朽的烂木。会流血的木头，提利昂心不在焉地想，接着第二个人朝他攻来。提利昂弯身躲开他的剑，挥出斧头，那人连忙后退……结果凯特琳·史塔克刚好走到他背后，割了他喉咙。骑马那人似乎想起别处有更重要的战斗，突然就快速跑开了。
Tyrion looked around. The enemy were all vanquished or vanished. Somehow the fighting had ended when he wasn’t looking. Dying horses and wounded men lay all around, screaming or moaning. To his vast astonishment, he was not one of them. He opened his fingers and let the axe thunk to the ground. His hands were sticky with blood. He could have sworn they had been fighting for half a day, but the sun seemed scarcely to have moved at all.
提利昂环顾四周，敌人不是被杀便是逃走，总之战斗在他没注意到的时候已经结束。遍地都是濒死的马和负伤的人，发出惨叫和呻吟。最令他惊讶的是自己竟安然无恙。他松开手指，斧头锵一声落在地上，忽然发现自己满手是血。他相信他们起码打了半天之久，但太阳却纹丝未动。
“Your first battle?” Bronn asked later as he bent over Jyck’s body, pulling off his boots. They were good boots, as befit one of Lord Tywin’s men; heavy leather, oiled and supple, much finer than what Bronn was wearing.
“第一次上战场？”过了一会儿，波隆站在杰克的尸体上一边弯身脱靴子，一边问。那是双好靴子，厚实的皮革，上过油，柔软异常，正配泰温公爵手下的身份，比起波隆穿的要好太多了。
Tyrion nodded. “My father will be so proud,” he said. His legs were cramping so badly he could scarcely stand. Odd, he had never once noticed the pain during the battle.
提利昂点点头。“我老爸应该会骄傲。”他说。他的脚抽筋得厉害，几乎无法站立。奇怪，刚才打斗时却一点不觉得疼。
“You need a woman now,” Bronn said with a glint in his black eyes. He shoved the boots into his saddlebag. “Nothing like a woman after a man’s been blooded, take my word.”
“你需要找个女人，”波隆眨着黑眼睛，顺手将靴子扔进自己的马鞍袋。“相信我，流过血之后，找个女人最来劲。”
Chiggen stopped looting the corpses of the brigands long enough to snort and lick his lips.
听见这话，契根停下对土匪尸体的搜刮，哼了一声，舔舔舌头。
Tyrion glanced over to where Lady Stark was dressing Ser Rodrik’s wounds. “I’m willing if she is,” he said. The freeriders broke into laughter, and Tyrion grinned and thought, There’s a start .
提利昂瞄了一眼正帮罗德利克爵士包扎的史塔克夫人。“她说好我就上。”他说。两个流浪武士听了哈哈大笑，提利昂一边跟着乐一边想：这是个好的开始。
Afterward he knelt by the stream and washed the blood off his face in water cold as ice. As he limped back to the others, he glanced again at the slain. The dead clansmen were thin, ragged men, their horses scrawny and undersized, with every rib showing. What weapons Bronn and Chiggen had left them were none too impressive. Mauls, clubs, a scythe … He remembered the big man in the shadowskin cloak who had dueled Ser Rodrik with a two-handed greatsword, but when he found his corpse sprawled on the stony ground, the man was not so big after all, the cloak was gone, and Tyrion saw that the blade was badly notched, its cheap steel spotted with rust. Small wonder the clansmen had left nine bodies on the ground.
随后他跪在溪边，用冰冷刺骨的溪水洗去脸上血迹。他瘸着腿走回去时，又看了看地上的死人。战死的原住民都是些衣衫褴褛、瘦骨嶙峋的家伙，他们的坐骑也是又瘦又小，根根肋骨清楚可见。波隆和契根挑剩下的武器都不怎么起眼，大锤、棍棒，还有一把镰刀……他想起那个穿了影子山猫皮披风、拿双手巨剑和罗德利克爵士对打的大汉，但当他看到那人四肢伸展躺在石地上的尸首时，他看起来一点也不高大。他的披风没了踪影，提利昂发现他的剑锋早就布满缺口，廉价钢铁锈得厉害。难怪原住民倒下九个。
They had only three dead; two of Lord Bracken’s men-at-arms, Kurleket and Mohor, and his own man Jyck, who had made such a bold show with his bareback charge. A fool to the end , Tyrion thought.
他们这边只死了三人：两个布雷肯伯爵的手下——库雷凯特和摩霍尔，还有他自己的护卫杰克，他奋不顾身的冲锋充分显示了他的愚勇。到死都还是傻子一个，提利昂心想。
“Lady Stark, I urge you to press on, with all haste,” Ser Willis Wode said, his eyes scanning the ridgetops warily through the slit in his helm. “We drove them off for the moment, but they will not have gone far.”
“史塔克夫人，我请求您立刻动身，加紧赶路。”维里·渥德爵士道，他透过头盔上那道细缝，小心翼翼地扫视着附近山脊。“我们虽然暂时赶跑了他们，但他们不会走远。”
“We must bury our dead, Ser Willis,” she said. “These were brave men. I will not leave them to the crows and shadowcats.”
“维里爵士，我们应该先安葬死者。”她说，“他们英勇殉难，我不能把他们留在这里给乌鸦和山猫糟蹋。”
“This soil is too stony for digging,” Ser Willis said.
“这里土地多石，没法挖的。”维里爵士道。
“Then we shall gather stones for cairns.”
“那我们就搬石头堆石冢。”
“Gather all the stones you want,” Bronn told her, “but do it without me or Chiggen. I’ve better things to do than pile rocks on dead men … breathing, for one.” He looked over the rest of the survivors. “Any of you who hope to be alive come nightfall, ride with us.”
“要怎么搬随你便，”波隆告诉她，“但我和契根可不干。比起在死人身上堆石头，我还有更要紧的事情……比如呼吸。”他环视其余的生还者。“你们要是还想活过今晚，就跟我们走。”
“My lady, I fear he speaks the truth,” Ser Rodrik said wearily. The old knight had been wounded in the fight, a deep gash in his left arm and a spear thrust that grazed his neck, and he sounded his age. “If we linger here, they will be on us again for a certainty, and we may not live through a second attack.”
“夫人，恐怕他说的没错。”罗德利克爵士虚弱地说。老骑士在打斗中负了伤，左臂被深深割了一道，脖子也被掷出的标枪擦伤，如今老态尽露。“若是在此逗留，他们一定会再次攻击，到时候我们可能就顶不住了。”
Tyrion could see the anger in Catelyn’s face, but she had no choice. “May the gods forgive us, then. We will ride at once.”
提利昂看出凯特琳脸上的愤怒，但她别无选择。“那就祈祷天上诸神原谅我们罢。我们这就动身。”
There was no shortage of horses now. Tyrion moved his saddle to Jyck’s spotted gelding, who looked strong enough to last another three or four days at least. He was about to mount when Lharys stepped up and said, “I’ll take that dirk now, dwarf.”
现在马倒是不缺。提利昂把他的马鞍移到杰克的花斑公马背上，因为它看起来还算强壮，再撑个三四天应该没问题。他正准备上马，只见拉利斯往前一站道：“侏儒，把你的匕首交给我。”
“Let him keep it.” Catelyn Stark looked down from her horse. “And see that he has his axe back as well. We may have need of it if we are attacked again.”
“让他留着吧。”凯特琳·史塔克从马上往下俯看，“斧头也还给他，若是再遇攻击，可能还用得着。”
“You have my thanks, lady,” Tyrion said, mounting up.
“夫人，谢谢您。”提利昂说着爬上马。
“Save them,” she said curtly. “I trust you no more than I did before.” She was gone before he could frame a reply.
“省省吧，”她唐突地说，“我跟以前一样不信任你。”他还来不及回嘴，她便拍马离开。
Tyrion adjusted his stolen helm and took the axe from Bronn. He remembered how he had begun the journey, with his wrists bound and a hood pulled down over his head, and decided that this was a definite improvement. Lady Stark could keep her trust; so long as he could keep the axe, he would count himself ahead in the game.
提利昂整了整偷来的头盔，然后从波隆手中接过斧头。他想起这趟旅程刚开始时，自己两手被绑，戴着头罩，如今堪称大有进展。史塔克夫人不信任他没关系，只要他能留住斧头，他就有信心在这场游戏里胜过对手。
Ser Willis Wode led them out. Bronn took the rear, with Lady Stark safely in the middle, Ser Rodrik a shadow beside her. Marillion kept throwing sullen looks back at Tyrion as they rode. The singer had broken several ribs, his woodharp, and all four fingers on his playing hand, yet the day had not been an utter loss to him; somewhere he had acquired a magnificent shadowskin cloak, thick black fur slashed by stripes of white. He huddled beneath its folds silently, and for once had nothing to say.
维里·渥德领队，波隆负责殿后，史塔克夫人安全地骑在队伍中间，罗德利克爵士则如影随形跟在她身旁。途中，马瑞里安带着怨恨的眼光，不断回头看他，他的几根肋骨，木头竖琴，还有用来弹奏的四根指头通通断了，但他还不算倒楣到极点：他弄来一件漂亮的影子山猫皮披风，厚实的黑毛皮，点缀着白线。他沉默地缩在斗篷里，难得地闭上了嘴巴。
They heard the deep growls of shadowcats behind them before they had gone half a mile, and later the wild snarling of the beasts fighting over the corpses they had left behind. Marillion grew visibly pale. Tyrion trotted up beside him. “Craven,” he said, “rhymes nicely with raven.” He kicked his horse and moved past the singer, up to Ser Rodrik and Catelyn Stark.
行不到半里，他们便听见背后影子山猫低沉的吼叫，稍后又传来它们争食尸体的咆哮。马瑞里安的脸色愈加苍白，提利昂骑马跑到他旁边。“‘黑鸟’，”他道，“恰好跟‘胆子小’押韵。”说完他一踢马肚，丢下吟游诗人，跑到罗德利克爵士和凯特琳·史塔克身边。
She looked at him, lips pressed tightly together.
她抿紧嘴唇看着他。
“As I was saying before we were so rudely interrupted,” Tyrion began, “there is a serious flaw in Littlefinger’s fable. Whatever you may believe of me, Lady Stark, I promise you this—I never bet against my family.”
“刚才我话说到一半，就被人无礼地打断了。”提利昂开口道，“小指头编的故事里有个很严重的疏漏。史塔克夫人，无论你信不信，我可以向你保证——我跟别人赌的时候，只把注下在自家人身上。”
*ARYA
第三十三章 艾莉亚
T he one-eared black tom arched his back and hissed at her.
独耳的黑公猫拱起背朝她嘶叫。
Arya padded down the alley, balanced lightly on the balls of her bare feet, listening to the flutter of her heart, breathing slow deep breaths. Quiet as a shadow , she told herself, light as a feather . The tomcat watched her come, his eyes wary.
艾莉亚沿着小路走，赤裸的脚跟保持平衡，倾听心脏疾跳，深呼吸缓吐气。静如影，她告诉自己，轻如羽。公猫看着她渐渐逼近，眼里充满警戒。
Catching cats was hard. Her hands were covered with half-healed scratches, and both knees were scabbed over where she had scraped them raw in tumbles. At first even the cook’s huge fat kitchen cat had been able to elude her, but Syrio had kept her at it day and night. When she’d run to him with her hands bleeding, he had said, “So slow? Be quicker, girl. Your enemies will give you more than scratches.” He had dabbed her wounds with Myrish fire, which burned so bad she had had to bite her lip to keep from screaming. Then he sent her out after more cats.
抓猫难。她手上到处都是未愈的抓痕，两脚膝盖则因跌倒擦伤，结满了疤。刚开始，连厨师养的那只厨房胖猫都能躲过她，但西利欧叫她日夜不停地练习。当她满手是血找上他时，他只说：“怎么这么慢？小妹妹，动作要快。等你遇到敌人，就不只是抓伤而已了。”他为她在伤口涂上密尔火，烫极了，她咬紧嘴唇才没大声尖叫。然后他又叫她继续去抓猫。
The Red Keep was full of cats: lazy old cats dozing in the sun, cold-eyed mousers twitching their tails, quick little kittens with claws like needles, ladies’ cats all combed and trusting, ragged shadows prowling the midden heaps. One by one Arya had chased them down and snatched them up and brought them proudly to Syrio Forel … all but this one, this one-eared black devil of a tomcat. “That’s the real king of this castle right there,” one of the gold cloaks had told her. “Older than sin and twice as mean. One time, the king was feasting the queen’s father, and that black bastard hopped up on the table and snatched a roast quail right out of Lord Tywin’s fingers. Robert laughed so hard he like to burst. You stay away from that one, child.”
红堡到处都是猫：有在太阳下打盹的慵懒老猫、有冷眼摆尾的捕鼠猫、有爪子利如尖针的灵巧小猫、还有宫廷仕女养的猫，一身的毛梳理柔顺，乖巧听话，以及浑身脏兮兮、专门在垃圾堆里出没的黑猫。艾莉亚一只一只追踪到底，然后拎起来，得意万分地带回去给西利欧·佛瑞尔……如今就只差这只独耳的黑色小恶魔啦。“那家伙才是城堡里真正的王，”有位穿金披风的都城守卫告诉她，“不但老不死，还坏得跟什么似的。有次国王宴请他老丈人，结果那黑心肝的混球跳上桌，从泰温大人的手里大摇大摆地叼走一只烤鹌鹑。劳勃笑得快爆炸。小乖乖，你离那坏蛋远点。”
He had run her halfway across the castle; twice around the Tower of the Hand, across the inner bailey, through the stables, down the serpentine steps, past the small kitchen and the pig yard and the barracks of the gold cloaks, along the base of the river wall and up more steps and back and forth over Traitor’s Walk, and then down again and through a gate and around a well and in and out of strange buildings until Arya didn’t know where she was.
为了抓它，她跑遍半个城堡：绕了首相塔两圈，穿越内城中庭，钻进马厩，走下层层环绕的螺旋梯，经过小厨房、养猪场和都城守卫队的营房，顺着临河城墙的根基，再上楼梯，在叛徒走道上来来回回，然后又下楼，出一道门，绕过一口井，进出前方形形色色的建筑，到最后艾莉亚根本不知自己所在何处。
Now at last she had him. High walls pressed close on either side, and ahead was a blank windowless mass of stone. Quiet as a shadow , she repeated, sliding forward, light as a feather .
这下她总算逮着它了。左右两边都是高墙，前方则是大片没开窗的石壁。静如影，她滑步向前，在心中重复，轻如羽。
When she was three steps away from him, the tomcat bolted. Left, then right, he went; and right, then left, went Arya, cutting off his escape. He hissed again and tried to dart between her legs. Quick as a snake , she thought. Her hands closed around him. She hugged him to her chest, whirling and laughing aloud as his claws raked at the front of her leather jerkin. Ever so fast, she kissed him right between the eyes, and jerked her head back an instant before his claws would have found her face. The tomcat yowled and spit.
当她离它只剩三步之遥时，公猫倏地冲了出来。先往左，再往右，艾莉亚便先挡右，再挡左，切断了它逃生的路。它又发出嘶叫，试图从她两脚之间溜走。迅如蛇，她心想。她伸手抓住它，把它抱在胸前，乐得放声大笑，四处转圈，任由它的利爪撕扯她的皮上衣。她用更快的速度在它两眼之间轻吻一下，并在它伸出爪子抓她脸的前一刻缩回。公猫嘶吼着朝她吐口水。
“What’s he doing to that cat?”
“他在跟那只猫做什么？”
Startled, Arya dropped the cat and whirled toward the voice. The tom bounded off in the blink of an eye. At the end of the alley stood a girl with a mass of golden curls, dressed as pretty as a doll in blue satin. Beside her was a plump little blond boy with a prancing stag sewn in pearls across the front of his doublet and a miniature sword at his belt. Princess Myrcella and Prince Tommen , Arya thought. A septa as large as a draft horse hovered over them, and behind her two big men in crimson cloaks, Lannister house guards.
艾莉亚吓了一跳，松开猫，旋身面对声音的来源。公猫转瞬间便一溜烟逃走。小巷的另一端站着一个满头金卷发、穿着蓝锦缎衣服、漂亮得像个洋娃娃似的女孩。她身边有个胖嘟嘟的金发小男孩，外衣胸前用珍珠绣了一只昂首腾跃的公鹿，腰际配了把微型剑。是弥赛菈公主和托曼王子，艾莉亚心想。他们身边跟了一个块头大得像犁马的修女，她背后还有两个兰尼斯特家的贴身护卫，都是牛高马大的汉子。
“What were you doing to that cat, boy?” Myrcella asked again, sternly. To her brother she said, “He’s a ragged boy, isn’t he? Look at him.” She giggled.
“小弟弟，你在跟那只猫做什么啊？”弥赛菈口气严厉地再度发问，然后对弟弟说，“你瞧，他还真是个脏兮兮的小弟弟，对不对？”
“A ragged dirty smelly boy,” Tommen agreed.
“对，衣服破烂，又脏又臭的小弟弟。”托曼同意。
They don’t know me , Arya realized. They don’t even know I’m a girl . Small wonder; she was barefoot and dirty, her hair tangled from the long run through the castle, clad in a jerkin ripped by cat claws and brown roughspun pants hacked off above her scabby knees. You don’t wear skirts and silks when you’re catching cats. Quickly she lowered her head and dropped to one knee. Maybe they wouldn’t recognize her. If they did, she would never hear the end of it. Septa Mordane would be mortified, and Sansa would never speak to her again from the shame.
他们没认出我，艾莉亚这才明白，他们甚至不知道我是女孩。这也难怪，她光着脚丫，全身肮脏，在城堡里跑过一圈以后，头发乱成一团，身上的皮背心布满了猫的爪痕，粗布缝制的棕色裤子膝盖以下都被割掉，露出伤疤遍布的双脚——抓猫总不能穿裙子或丝衣吧。她连忙低头，单膝跪下。他们要是认不出她来，就太好了。若是被认出来，她会吃不了兜着走的。因为这不但会丢光茉丹修女的脸，连珊莎也将觉得可耻，从此再不跟她说话。
The old fat septa moved forward. “Boy, how did you come here? You have no business in this part of the castle.”
肥胖的老修女往前挪了挪。“小弟弟，你怎么跑到这里来的？你不该在城堡里到处乱跑喔。”
“You can’t keep this sort out,” one of the red cloaks said. “Like trying to keep out rats.”
“没办法，这种人赶也赶不完，”一个红袍卫士道，“跟赶老鼠一样的道理。”
“Who do you belong to, boy?” the septa demanded. “Answer me. What’s wrong with you, are you mute?”
“小弟弟，你是谁家的孩子？”修女质问，“告诉我。你怎么了？你是哑巴吗？”
Arya’s voice caught in her throat. If she answered, Tommen and Myrcella would know her for certain.
艾莉亚的话音卡在喉咙里。如果她出声回答，托曼和弥赛菈一定会认出她来。
“Godwyn, bring him here,” the septa said. The taller of the guardsmen started down the alley.
“高德温，把他带过来。”修女说。长得较高的那名卫士朝小巷的这边走来。
Panic gripped her throat like a giant’s hand. Arya could not have spoken if her life had hung on it. Calm as still water , she mouthed silently.
恐慌如巨人的手攫住她的喉咙，艾莉亚知道自己命悬于此，不发出半点声音。止如水，她在心里默念。
As Godwyn reached for her, Arya moved. Quick as a snake . She leaned to her left, letting his fingers brush her arm, spinning around him. Smooth as summer silk . By the time he got himself turned, she was sprinting down the alley. Swift as a deer . The septa was screeching at her. Arya slid between legs as thick and white as marble columns, bounded to her feet, bowled into Prince Tommen and hopped over him when he sat down hard and said “Oof,” spun away from the second guard, and then she was past them all, running full out.
就在高德温伸手的前一刻，艾莉亚采取了行动。迅如蛇。她重心左移，他的手指擦臂而过。她绕过他。柔如丝。待他转身，她已朝巷口飞奔而去。疾如鹿。修女朝她尖叫，艾莉亚从她两条粗得像白色大理石柱的腿中间钻过去，站起身，迎面撞上托曼王子，他“哎哟”一声重重坐倒。她从他身上跳过，闪开第二个侍卫，然后她便摆脱他们，全速逃走。
She heard shouts, then pounding footsteps, closing behind her. She dropped and rolled. The red cloak went careening past her, stumbling. Arya sprang back to her feet. She saw a window above her, high and narrow, scarcely more than an arrow slit. Arya leapt, caught the sill, pulled herself up. She held her breath as she wriggled through. Slippery as an eel . Dropping to the floor in front of a startled scrubwoman, she hopped up, brushed the rushes off her clothes, and was off again, out the door and along a long hall, down a stair, across a hidden courtyard, around a corner and over a wall and through a low narrow window into a pitch-dark cellar. The sounds grew more and more distant behind her.
她听见叫喊，紧接着是砰砰砰的脚步迅速朝她逼近。她身子一蹲，着地滚开。红衣卫士踉跄着冲过她身边，差点跌倒。艾莉亚一跃起身，看到头上有扇又高又窄的窗子，比城墙上的射箭孔大不了多少，便向上一跳，攀住窗台，往上拉升，闭着气往里挤。滑如鳗。待她跳下窗口，正落在一名吃惊的洗衣妇面前，她立刻翻身，拍拍尘土，继续逃跑。她穿门而出，奔过长厅，跑下楼梯，穿越一座隐蔽的庭院，绕过转角，翻过墙，挤进一扇低矮窄窗后，来到一个伸手不见五指的漆黑地窖。身后追赶的声音渐渐变小。
Arya was out of breath and quite thoroughly lost. She was in for it now if they had recognized her, but she didn’t think they had. She’d moved too fast. Swift as a deer .
艾莉亚几乎喘不过气，完全迷失了方向。现在就算他们认出她，她也认栽了，但她觉得他们应该做不到，因为她动作太快了。疾如鹿。
She hunkered down in the dark against a damp stone wall and listened for the pursuit, but the only sound was the beating of her own heart and a distant drip of water. Quiet as a shadow , she told herself. She wondered where she was. When they had first come to King’s Landing, she used to have bad dreams about getting lost in the castle. Father said the Red Keep was smaller than Winterfell, but in her dreams it had been immense, an endless stone maze with walls that seemed to shift and change behind her. She would find herself wandering down gloomy halls past faded tapestries, descending endless circular stairs, darting through courtyards or over bridges, her shouts echoing unanswered. In some of the rooms the red stone walls would seem to drip blood, and nowhere could she find a window. Sometimes she would hear her father’s voice, but always from a long way off, and no matter how hard she ran after it, it would grow fainter and fainter, until it faded to nothing and Arya was alone in the dark.
她摸黑靠着一堵潮湿的石墙蹲下，静听追兵的响动，却只听见自己的心跳和远处的滴水声。静如影，她告诉自己。她纳闷自己究竟置身何处。初来君临时，她常做恶梦，梦见自己迷失在城堡里。父亲说红堡比临冬城要小，但在梦中它却硕大无比，活像一座无边无际的石造迷宫，而墙壁仿佛会在她身后变换形体。她发现自己常漫游在阴森的厅堂里，经过褪色的壁毡，走下无止尽的螺旋楼梯，在庭院间和吊桥上穿梭，尖声叫喊却无人回应。有些房间里，红墙似乎在滴血，而她一扇窗户也找不到。有的时候，她能听见父亲的声音，但总是从遥远的地方传来，而不论她如何努力地朝声音来源飞奔，那声音却依旧越来越微弱，直至完全消失。黑暗之中，只剩艾莉亚独自一人。
It was very dark right now, she realized. She hugged her bare knees tight against her chest and shivered. She would wait quietly and count to ten thousand. By then it would be safe for her to come creeping back out and find her way home.
她发觉这里也很暗，于是缩起裸露的膝盖，紧紧抱在胸前，发起抖来。她决定在这里默默数到一万，等那时候就可以安全地爬出去，找路回家了。
By the time she had reached eighty-seven, the room had begun to lighten as her eyes adjusted to the blackness. Slowly the shapes around her took on form. Huge empty eyes stared at her hungrily through the gloom, and dimly she saw the jagged shadows of long teeth. She had lost the count. She closed her eyes and bit her lip and sent the fear away. When she looked again, the monsters would be gone. Would never have been. She pretended that Syrio was beside her in the dark, whispering in her ear. Calm as still water , she told herself. Strong as a bear. Fierce as a wolverine . She opened her eyes again.
当她数到八十七的时候，眼睛已经习惯了黑暗，房间也似乎逐渐亮起来，身边的事物缓缓现形。昏暗之中，无数巨大而空洞的眼睛饥渴地瞪着她。她隐约看到长牙的锯齿阴影。她顿时忘了数到哪里，只敢闭上眼睛，咬住嘴唇，驱赶恐惧。等她睁眼再看，怪兽就会不见。怪兽会不存在。她假装西利欧也在黑暗中，陪在她身边，对她悄声说话。止如水，她告诉自己，壮如熊，猛如狼，然后睁开眼睛。
The monsters were still there, but the fear was gone.
怪兽还在，恐惧却消失了。
Arya got to her feet, moving warily. The heads were all around her. She touched one, curious, wondering if it was real. Her fingertips brushed a massive jaw. It felt real enough. The bone was smooth beneath her hand, cold and hard to the touch. She ran her fingers down a tooth, black and sharp, a dagger made of darkness. It made her shiver.
艾莉亚小心翼翼地站起来。四周都是头骨，她好奇地摸摸其中一个，不知到底是不是真的。她的指尖拂过一个宽大的下巴，摸起来挺像真的。骨头的感觉很平滑，既冷且硬。她的手指摸到一颗牙齿，又黑又尖，活像是由黑暗所造的匕首，她不禁打了个寒颤。
“It’s dead,” she said aloud. “It’s just a skull, it can’t hurt me.” Yet somehow the monster seemed to know she was there. She could feel its empty eyes watching her through the gloom, and there was something in that dim, cavernous room that did not love her. She edged away from the skull and backed into a second, larger than the first. For an instant she could feel its teeth digging into her shoulder, as if it wanted a bite of her flesh. Arya whirled, felt leather catch and tear as a huge fang nipped at her jerkin, and then she was running. Another skull loomed ahead, the biggest monster of all, but Arya did not even slow. She leapt over a ridge of black teeth as tall as swords, dashed through hungry jaws, and threw herself against the door.
“它死了。”她朗声道，“只是颗骷髅头，伤不了我的。”但不知怎的，那怪兽似乎知道她在这儿。她感觉得到它空洞的眼睛穿过阴暗看着她，在这个光线微弱、宽敞高大的房间里，有种不喜欢她的东西存在。她避开那个头颅，向后退开，却又碰到一个更大的骷髅。一时间她几乎可以感觉它的牙齿陷进她的肩膀，仿佛想一口咬下她的血肉。艾莉亚旋身，一颗尖牙果然已经咬住她的外衣，皮革被钩住，撕裂了一大块，她没命似的快跑。眼前又有一个头颅出现，这是最大的怪兽。艾莉亚不敢慢步，她跳过一排高得像剑、山脊似的黑牙齿，冲进一个又一个饥饿的血盆大口，然后撞上了门。
Her hands found a heavy iron ring set in the wood, and she yanked at it. The door resisted a moment, before it slowly began to swing inward, with a creak so loud Arya was certain it could be heard all through the city. She opened the door just far enough to slip through, into the hallway beyond.
她摸黑找到木门上厚重的铁环，使劲一拉，门抗拒了一会儿，方才缓缓向内打开，可是发出来的嘎吱声却大得吓人，艾莉亚心想这下全城的人都会听见了。她拉开恰好能让自己钻进去的缝隙，溜进门后的长厅。
If the room with the monsters had been dark, the hall was the blackest pit in the seven hells. Calm as still water , Arya told herself, but even when she gave her eyes a moment to adjust, there was nothing to see but the vague grey outline of the door she had come through. She wiggled her fingers in front of her face, felt the air move, saw nothing. She was blind. A water dancer sees with all her senses , she reminded herself. She closed her eyes and steadied her breathing one two three, drank in the quiet, reached out with her hands.
如果刚刚那个充满怪兽的房间算得上黑暗，那这个大厅就是七层地狱里最伸手不见五指的黑洞。止如水，艾莉亚告诉自己，她给了眼睛足够的调适时间，但除了刚才进来的门有模糊的灰色轮廓，其余依旧什么也看不到。她伸出手指在面前摇晃，感觉到空气的移动，却没有东西。她成了瞎子。水舞者要用所有的感官去洞察周围，她提醒自己。于是她闭上眼，稳住呼吸数了一二三，静静吸口气，然后伸出双手，开始摸索。
Her fingers brushed against rough unfinished stone to her left. She followed the wall, her hand skimming along the surface, taking small gliding steps through the darkness. All halls lead somewhere. Where there is a way in , there is a way out. Fear cuts deeper than swords . Arya would not be afraid. It seemed as if she had been walking a long ways when the wall ended abruptly and a draft of cold air blew past her cheek. Loose hairs stirred faintly against her skin.
左手边，她的指头拂过未完工的粗石表面。她便沿着墙走，手在石面游移，踏着小碎步慢慢穿越黑暗。每个房间总有出路，有进必有出嘛。而且，恐惧比利剑更伤人。艾莉亚不能害怕。她仿佛走了好长一段，墙壁突然到了尽头，一团冷气吹过她的脸颊。松开的头发轻轻拍打着她的皮肤。
From somewhere far below her, she heard noises. The scrape of boots, the distant sound of voices. A flickering light brushed the wall ever so faintly, and she saw that she stood at the top of a great black well, a shaft twenty feet across plunging deep into the earth. Huge stones had been set into the curving walls as steps, circling down and down, dark as the steps to hell that Old Nan used to tell them of. And something was coming up out of the darkness, out of the bowels of the earth …
她听见有声音从下方很远的地方传来。靴子的磨地声，遥远的交谈声。摇曳的火光朦胧地扫过墙壁，她这才发现自己正站在一口大黑井边，井足足有二十尺宽，开口直向地心。弯曲的墙上嵌了大石头作为楼梯，向下回旋回旋，漆黑得就像老奶妈以前常跟他们说的，通往地狱的阶梯。有东西正从黑暗中爬出来，从地心深处爬出来……
Arya peered over the edge and felt the cold black breath on her face. Far below, she saw the light of a single torch, small as the flame of a candle. Two men, she made out. Their shadows writhed against the sides of the well, tall as giants. She could hear their voices, echoing up the shaft.
艾莉亚趴在井边偷偷往下看，一股冰冷的黑气迎面袭来。下方极远处，她看到一根火把的亮光，微小有如烛火。她分辨出是两个人，他们的影子交错投射在墙上，高大有如巨人。她听见他们的声音，回荡着传向井边。
“… found one bastard,” one said. “The rest will come soon. A day, two days, a fortnight …”
“……找到了一个私生子，”一个人说，“其他的也迟早会查出来。要么一两天，最迟不过两星期……”
“And when he learns the truth, what will he do?” a second voice asked in the liquid accents of the Free Cities.
“等他查出真相，他会怎么做？”第二个声音是自由贸易城邦的滑溜口音。
“The gods alone know,” the first voice said. Arya could see a wisp of grey smoke drifting up off the torch, writhing like a snake as it rose. “The fools tried to kill his son, and what’s worse, they made a mummer’s farce of it. He’s not a man to put that aside. I warn you, the wolf and lion will soon be at each other’s throats, whether we will it or no.”
“只有天上诸神知道，”第一个声音说。艾莉亚看到火把冒出一缕灰烟，一边冉冉上升，一边像蛇似的翻腾缠绕。“那群蠢蛋想杀他儿子，更糟糕的是，他们将把事情全都搞砸。他可不是这么好打发的人。我警告你，不管我们喜不喜欢，狼和狮很快就会打成一团。”
“Too soon, too soon,” the voice with the accent complained. “What good is war now? We are not ready. Delay.”
“太快，太快了，”带着口音的声音抱怨，“现在开战有什么用？我们还没准备好。想办法拖一拖。”
“As well bid me stop time. Do you take me for a wizard?”
“倒不如叫我暂停时间。你以为我是巫师？”
The other chuckled. “No less.” Flames licked at the cold air. The tall shadows were almost on top of her. An instant later the man holding the torch climbed into her sight, his companion beside him. Arya crept back away from the well, dropped to her stomach, and flattened herself against the wall. She held her breath as the men reached the top of the steps.
另一人呵呵笑道：“我以为你的能耐绝对不输巫师。”火焰舐着冷空气，高大的影子几乎就要投射到她身上。几秒之后，持火把的人顺着楼梯进入她的视线范围，他的同伴跟在他身边。艾莉亚从井边爬开，趴下来，贴紧墙壁。眼看两人踏上楼梯顶端，她屏住了呼吸。
“What would you have me do?” asked the torchbearer, a stout man in a leather half cape. Even in heavy boots, his feet seemed to glide soundlessly over the ground. A round scarred face and a stubble of dark beard showed under his steel cap, and he wore mail over boiled leather, and a dirk and shortsword at his belt. It seemed to Arya there was something oddly familiar about him.
“你要我怎么办？”拿火把的人问。他是个身材粗壮的人，披着皮制的半身斗篷。虽然穿了厚重靴子，他的脚却仿佛无声地滑过路面。在他的钢头盔下，是张带伤疤的圆脸，还有撮短须。他穿着硬皮衣，外罩盔甲，腰间则系了一把匕首和一柄短剑。艾莉亚觉得他有种古怪的熟悉感。
“If one Hand can die, why not a second?” replied the man with the accent and the forked yellow beard. “You have danced the dance before, my friend.” He was no one Arya had ever seen before, she was certain of it. Grossly fat, yet he seemed to walk lightly, carrying his weight on the balls of his feet as a water dancer might. His rings glimmered in the torchlight, red-gold and pale silver, crusted with rubies, sapphires, slitted yellow tiger eyes. Every finger wore a ring; some had two.
“既然死了一个首相，为什么不能死第二个？”说话带着口音，长着一撮黄色八字胡的人回答。“我的好友啊，你从前不就跳过这种舞？”艾莉亚以前没见过他，这点她很确定。他虽然臃肿不堪，却步履轻盈，重心放在脚跟，走起路来像个水舞者该有的样子。他的戒指在火光下熠熠发光，有红金、白银、镶了红宝石、蓝宝石，其中更有黄纹的老虎眼。每根指头都戴有戒指，有些还戴了两颗。
“Before is not now, and this Hand is not the other,” the scarred man said as they stepped out into the hall. Still as stone , Arya told herself, quiet as a shadow . Blinded by the blaze of their own torch, they did not see her pressed flat against the stone, only a few feet away.
“从前不比现在，如今的首相也不一样。”脸上有疤的人边说边和同伴一起走进房间。不动如石，艾莉亚告诉自己，静如影。眩目于自己带来的火光，他们没看到她平平地贴紧石头，离他们仅数尺之遥。
“Perhaps so,” the forked beard replied, pausing to catch his breath after the long climb. “Nonetheless, we must have time. The princess is with child. The khal will not bestir himself until his son is born. You know how they are, these savages.”
“或许吧，”八字胡男子回答，刚爬了这大段路，这时他停下来喘口气。“但无论如何，我们需要更多时间。公主已有了身孕，在儿子诞生之前，卡奥是不会出兵的。你也清楚这些野蛮人，知道他们什么德行。”
The man with the torch pushed at something. Arya heard a deep rumbling. A huge slab of rock, red in the torchlight, slid down out of the ceiling with a resounding crash that almost made her cry out. Where the entry to the well had been was nothing but stone, solid and unbroken.
拿火把的人推了推什么东西，艾莉亚听见一阵低沉的轰隆声。接着，一片巨大的石板从井口缓缓滑出，在火光照耀下成了艳红，它在室内发出隆隆巨响，差点害她叫出声来。等到声音平复，刚才井口所在的位置，只有一片平滑坚硬、毫无裂缝的石头。
“If he does not bestir himself soon, it may be too late,” the stout man in the steel cap said. “This is no longer a game for two players, if ever it was. Stannis Baratheon and Lysa Arryn have fled beyond my reach, and the whispers say they are gathering swords around them. The Knight of Flowers writes Highgarden, urging his lord father to send his sister to court. The girl is a maid of fourteen, sweet and beautiful and tractable, and Lord Renly and Ser Loras intend that Robert should bed her, wed her, and make a new queen. Littlefinger … the gods only know what game Littlefinger is playing. Yet Lord Stark’s the one who troubles my sleep. He has the bastard, he has the book, and soon enough he’ll have the truth. And now his wife has abducted Tyrion Lannister, thanks to Littlefinger’s meddling. Lord Tywin will take that for an outrage, and Jaime has a queer affection for the Imp. If the Lannisters move north, that will bring the Tullys in as well. Delay , you say. Make haste , I reply. Even the finest of jugglers cannot keep a hundred balls in the air forever.”
“若他不赶紧出兵，恐怕就来不及了。”戴着钢盔的粗胖男子说，“这已经不再是一场两人对弈的游戏了——如果以前可以称得上是的话。史坦尼斯·拜拉席恩和莱莎·艾林已逃离我的掌握范围，根据回报，他们正在囤积兵力。百花骑士写信回高庭，力劝他公爵老爸送他妹妹入宫。她是个十四岁的的黄花闺女，既漂亮又听话，蓝礼大人和洛拉斯爵士打算让劳勃上她，然后娶她，另立新后。至于小指头……天上诸神才知道小指头在玩什么把戏。但尤其让我坐立难安的却是史塔克大人。他找到了那个私生子，也拿到了那本书，迟早会猜出端倪。现在的情况倒该感谢小指头搅局，他太太绑架了提利昂·兰尼斯特，他必将无暇多顾。然而泰温公爵绝咽不下这口气，詹姆又对小恶魔怀有古怪的感情。若是兰尼斯特对北方用兵，那么徒利家也将被牵扯进来。你叫我拖一拖，我却要叫你加快行动啊。就算最厉害的杂耍戏子也没法永远把一百颗球抛在空中呐。”
“You are more than a juggler, old friend. You are a true sorcerer. All I ask is that you work your magic awhile longer.” They started down the hall in the direction Arya had come, past the room with the monsters.
“老朋友，你可不只是杂耍戏子，你是个真正的魔术师。我不过请你多变一会儿戏法罢了。”他们朝艾莉亚来时的方向走去，穿过充满怪兽的房间。
“What I can do, I will,” the one with the torch said softly. “I must have gold, and another fifty birds.”
“只要我能做的，我都会去做。”拿火把的人轻声说，“但我需要经费，还要五十只鸟儿。”
She let them get a long way ahead, then went creeping after them. Quiet as a shadow .
她等他们走远后才偷偷跟在后面。静如影。
“So many?” The voices were fainter as the light dwindled ahead of her. “The ones you need are hard to find … so young, to know their letters … perhaps older … not die so easy …”
“要那么多？”前方光线渐暗，声音也愈见微弱。“你要的这种可不好找……既要年轻，又要识字……如果年纪稍大一点……不那么容易送命……”
“No. The younger are safer … treat them gently …”
“不，年轻的比较安全……对他们好一点……”
“… if they kept their tongues …”
“……如果他们保住口舌……”
“… the risk …”
“……冒风险……”
Long after their voices had faded away, Arya could still see the light of the torch, a smoking star that bid her follow. Twice it seemed to disappear, but she kept on straight, and both times she found herself at the top of steep, narrow stairs, the torch glimmering far below her. She hurried after it, down and down. Once she stumbled over a rock and fell against the wall, and her hand found raw earth supported by timbers, whereas before the tunnel had been dressed stone.
声音淡去后许久，艾莉亚依然能看见火把的光亮，如一颗冒烟的星星，吸引她跟随。有两次，它几乎失去了踪影，但她一径向前，两次都发现自己走到险陡窄梯的顶端，火把的光芒则在遥远的下方。她急忙追赶，不断向下。中途她曾踢到石头，失足撞上墙壁，手指所触却是粗糙的泥土，由木材所支撑，并非先前的石造甬道。
She must have crept after them for miles. Finally they were gone, but there was no place to go but forward. She found the wall again and followed, blind and lost, pretending that Nymeria was padding along beside her in the darkness. At the end she was knee-deep in foul-smelling water, wishing she could dance upon it as Syrio might have, and wondering if she’d ever see light again. It was full dark when finally Arya emerged into the night air.
她一定爬了好几里。到最后，他们俩都不见了，而这里除了往上，无处可去。她重新摸索，找到墙壁，在完全迷失方向的情况下，盲目地往前走，一边假装黑暗中娜梅莉亚正跟在自己身边。走到尽头，她发现自己身陷及膝深、散发出恶臭的水里，她一边希望自己能像西利欧一样在水面轻舞，一边心想不知何时才能重见天日。等艾莉亚走入夜空之下时，天已经全黑。
She found herself standing at the mouth of a sewer where it emptied into the river. She stank so badly that she stripped right there, dropping her soiled clothing on the riverbank as she dove into the deep black waters. She swam until she felt clean, and crawled out shivering. Some riders went past along the river road as Arya was washing her clothes, but if they saw the scrawny naked girl scrubbing her rags in the moonlight, they took no notice.
她发现自己正站在下水道与河流相连的出水口。一身臭得要命，她干脆当场脱光，把脏衣服丢在河岸，潜入深深的黑水里，游啊游，直到她觉得舒适干净，这才颤抖着爬上岸。艾莉亚洗衣服时，有几个人骑马经过河滨道路，但就算他们看到了干巴巴的小女孩赤裸着身子，就着月光搓洗破烂不堪的衣服，也没特别在意。
She was miles from the castle, but from anywhere in King’s Landing you needed only to look up to see the Red Keep high on Aegon’s Hill, so there was no danger of losing her way. Her clothes were almost dry by the time she reached the gatehouse. The portcullis was down and the gates barred, so she turned aside to a postern door. The gold cloaks who had the watch sneered when she told them to let her in. “Off with you,” one said. “The kitchen scraps are gone, and we’ll have no begging after dark.”
她离城堡有好几里之遥，但不管身在君临的何地，只需一抬头便可看见那高高端坐于伊耿丘陵上的红堡，所以她不怕迷路。等她抵达城门，身上的衣服已干得差不多。铁闸早已降下，大门也上了闩，她不得不转向边门。当她吩咐他们让她进去时，守门的金袍卫士冷笑一声。“快滚罢，”其中一人说，“厨房的剩菜已经没了，天黑后不准乞讨。”
“I’m not a beggar,” she said. “I live here.”
“我不是乞丐，”她说：“我住这里。”
“I said, off with you . Do you need a clout on the ear to help your hearing?”
“我说快滚。还是要赏你两个耳刮子才听得懂？”
“I want to see my father.”
“我要找我父亲。”
The guards exchanged a glance. “I want to fuck the queen myself, for all the good it does me,” the younger one said.
两个守卫交换了眼神。“我还要搞王后咧。”年轻的那个说。
The older scowled. “Who’s this father of yours, boy, the city ratcatcher?”
比较老的那个皱眉道：“小子，你老爸是谁？抓老鼠的么？”
“The Hand of the King,” Arya told him.
“他是御前首相。”艾莉亚告诉他们。
Both men laughed, but then the older one swung his fist at her, casually, as a man would swat a dog. Arya saw the blow coming even before it began. She danced back out of the way, untouched. “I’m not a boy,” she spat at them. “I’m Arya Stark of Winterfell, and if you lay a hand on me my lord father will have both your heads on spikes. If you don’t believe me, fetch Jory Cassel or Vayon Poole from the Tower of the Hand.” She put her hands on her hips. “Now are you going to open the gate, or do you need a clout on the ear to help your hearing?”
两人哈哈大笑，紧接着老的那个一拳挥来，随随便便，像人欺负狗一样。艾莉亚早在他动手前便看清了，她往后轻轻退开，毫发未损。“我不是小子，”她朝他们吐口水，“我是临冬城的艾莉亚·史塔克，你要是敢碰我，我老爸会把你们两个的头砍下来挂在枪上。如果你们不相信我，就去首相塔找乔里·凯索和维扬·普尔问问。”她把小手背在身后。“你们是开门，还是要赏两个耳刮子才听得懂？”
Her father was alone in the solar when Harwin and Fat Tom marched her in, an oil lamp glowing softly at his elbow. He was bent over the biggest book Arya had ever seen, a great thick tome with cracked yellow pages of crabbed script, bound between faded leather covers, but he closed it to listen to Harwin’s report. His face was stern as he sent the men away with thanks.
哈尔温和胖汤姆把她送回去时，父亲正独自一人坐在书房，肘边一盏油灯发出柔亮的光。他弯身读着艾莉亚生平所见最大的一本书，这本厚重的书有着破烂的泛黄书页，上面密密麻麻写满了字，封皮则是褪色的皮革。他一脸严肃地向手下道谢，并把他们送走。
“You realize I had half my guard out searching for you?” Eddard Stark said when they were alone. “Septa Mordane is beside herself with fear. She’s in the sept praying for your safe return. Arya, you know you are never to go beyond the castle gates without my leave.”
“你知不知道我派出一半的卫士去找你？”等他们独处后，艾德·史塔克道，“茉丹修女慌得不知如何是好，现在还在圣堂里祈祷你平安归来。艾莉亚，你明明知道没有我的许可，不可以跑到城堡外面去。”
“I didn’t go out the gates,” she blurted. “Well, I didn’t mean to. I was down in the dungeons, only they turned into this tunnel. It was all dark, and I didn’t have a torch or a candle to see by, so I had to follow. I couldn’t go back the way I came on account of the monsters. Father, they were talking about killing you! Not the monsters, the two men. They didn’t see me, I was being still as stone and quiet as a shadow, but I heard them. They said you had a book and a bastard and if one Hand could die, why not a second? Is that the book? Jon’s the bastard, I bet.”
“我没有跑到城外去，”她冲口而出，“呃，我不是故意的。我本来是在地城里，后来又变成了隧道，那里好黑，我没有火把也没有蜡烛，所以只好一直走下去。我不敢从原路返回的，那样会碰到怪兽。爸爸，他们说要杀你！不是怪兽，是两个人。他们没看到我，因为我不动如石又静如影，但我听到他们说的话，他们说你找到了私生子拿到了书，还说既然一个首相可以死，为什么第二个不能死？你看的就是那本书吗？我敢打赌琼恩就是他们说的那个私生子啦。”
“Jon? Arya, what are you talking about? Who said this?”
“琼恩？艾莉亚，你在说些什么？这些话又是谁说的？”
“They did,” she told him. “There was a fat one with rings and a forked yellow beard, and another in mail and a steel cap, and the fat one said they had to delay but the other one told him he couldn’t keep juggling and the wolf and the lion were going to eat each other and it was a mummer’s farce.” She tried to remember the rest. She hadn’t quite understood everything she’d heard, and now it was all mixed up in her head. “The fat one said the princess was with child. The one in the steel cap, he had the torch, he said that they had to hurry. I think he was a wizard.”
“他们说的，”她告诉他，“一个是长着黄色开岔胡、手上戴满戒指的胖子，另一个人穿了铠甲戴着钢盔，胖的那个说要拖时间，可另外一个说自己没办法一直变戏法，还说狼和狮很快就会自相残杀，还说事情都搞砸了。”她试着回忆其他的部分。但她并不完全了解自己所听到的东西，现在又都在脑子里混成一团了。“胖的那个说公主怀了孩子，有钢盔的那个说的，他拿了火把，他说他们行动要快。我猜他是个巫师。”
“A wizard,” said Ned, unsmiling. “Did he have a long white beard and tall pointed hat speckled with stars?”
“巫师，”奈德皮笑肉不笑地说，“那他有没有长长的白胡子和镶满星星的尖帽子呢？”
“No! It wasn’t like Old Nan’s stories. He didn’t look like a wizard, but the fat one said he was.”
“没有！不像老奶妈的故事里那样。他看起来不像巫师，可胖的那个说他是。”
“I warn you, Arya, if you’re spinning this thread of air—”
“艾莉亚，我警告你，如果你这是在编故事……”
“No, I told you, it was in the dungeons, by the place with the secret wall. I was chasing cats, and well …” She screwed up her face. If she admitted knocking over Prince Tommen, he would be really angry with her. “… well, I went in this window. That’s where I found the monsters.”
“我没有，我跟你说了嘛，就是在地城那里，在秘密墙旁边。我本来在抓猫，结果……”她皱起脸，如果她说出撞倒托曼王子的事，他不气死才怪，到时候可就较真了。“……呃，反正我跑到一扇窗子边，我就是在那里发现怪兽的。”
“Monsters and wizards,” her father said. “It would seem you’ve had quite an adventure. These men you heard, you say they spoke of juggling and mummery?”
“先是巫师，现在又是怪兽，”父亲说，“看来这场冒险还真精彩。你听到这些人说什么，你说他们会变戏法和演戏？”
“Yes,” Arya admitted, “only—”
“是啊，”艾莉亚承认，“可是——”
“Arya, they were mummers,” her father told her. “There must be a dozen troupes in King’s Landing right now, come to make some coin off the tourney crowds. I’m not certain what these two were doing in the castle, but perhaps the king has asked for a show.”
“艾莉亚，他们是戏班里的人，”父亲告诉她，“这会儿君临大概有十来个戏班，想借着比武大会的人潮赚点钱呢。我不清楚这两个人在城里做什么，但说不定是国王请他们来表演的。”
“No.” She shook her head stubbornly. “They weren’t—”
“不是啦，”她固执地摇头，“他们不是——”
“You shouldn’t be following people about and spying on them in any case. Nor do I cherish the notion of my daughter climbing in strange windows after stray cats. Look at you, sweetling. Your arms are covered with scratches. This has gone on long enough. Tell Syrio Forel that I want a word with him—”
“更何况你一开始就不该跟踪别人、偷听他们说话，我也不喜欢自己女儿爬怪窗子抓流浪猫。亲爱的，看看你这样子，满手都是抓伤。不能再这样下去。告诉西利欧·佛瑞尔，我要跟他谈——”
He was interrupted by a short, sudden knock. “Lord Eddard, pardons,” Desmond called out, opening the door a crack, “but there’s a black brother here begging audience. He says the matter is urgent. I thought you would want to know.”
一阵短促的敲门声打断了他的话。“艾德大人，很抱歉打搅。”戴斯蒙叫道，把门打开一条小缝。“外面有个黑衣弟兄求见，说有要紧事相告。我想跟您通报一声。”
“My door is always open to the Night’s Watch,” Father said.
“我家的门永远为守夜人而开。”父亲说。
Desmond ushered the man inside. He was stooped and ugly, with an unkempt beard and unwashed clothes, yet Father greeted him pleasantly and asked his name.
戴斯蒙请那人进来。他驼着背，长相奇丑，一把未经修整的杂乱胡子，衣服也像是很久没洗了，但父亲依旧很愉快地问候他，并询问他的姓名。
“Yoren, as it please m’lord. My pardons for the hour.” He bowed to Arya. “And this must be your son. He has your look.”
“老爷，我叫尤伦。这么晚来打扰，真对不住。”他向艾莉亚鞠躬。“这一定是您的公子，长得跟您真像。”
“I’m a girl,” Arya said, exasperated. If the old man was down from the Wall, he must have come by way of Winterfell. “Do you know my brothers?” she asked excitedly. “Robb and Bran are at Winterfell, and Jon’s on the Wall. Jon Snow, he’s in the Night’s Watch too, you must know him, he has a direwolf, a white one with red eyes. Is Jon a ranger yet? I’m Arya Stark.” The old man in his smelly black clothes was looking at her oddly, but Arya could not seem to stop talking. “When you ride back to the Wall, would you bring Jon a letter if I wrote one?” She wished Jon were here right now. He’d believe her about the dungeons and the fat man with the forked beard and the wizard in the steel cap.
“我是女孩。”艾莉亚气急败坏地说。假如这老头是从长城来的，那他一定会经过临冬城。“你认识我哥哥和弟弟吗？”她兴奋地问，“罗柏和布兰在临冬城，琼恩在长城。琼恩·雪诺，他也是守夜人，你一定认识的，他有只冰原狼，白色的毛，红色的眼睛。琼恩当上游骑兵了吗？”穿臭衣服的老人一直用古怪的眼神看着她，但艾莉亚停不下来。“如果我写封信，你回长城去的时候，可不可以帮我带给琼恩？”她好希望琼恩此刻就在这里，他一定会相信她的，不管是地城、长八字胡的胖子，还是戴钢盔的巫师。
“My daughter often forgets her courtesies,” Eddard Stark said with a faint smile that softened his words. “I beg your forgiveness, Yoren. Did my brother Benjen send you?”
“小女时常忘记应有的礼数，”艾德·史塔克道。他挂着一抹淡淡的微笑，舒缓了他的口气。“尤伦，还请你见谅。是我弟弟班扬派你来的么？”
“No one sent me, m’lord, saving old Mormont. I’m here to find men for the Wall, and when Robert next holds court, I’ll bend the knee and cry our need, see if the king and his Hand have some scum in the dungeons they’d be well rid of. You might say as Benjen Stark is why we’re talking, though. His blood ran black. Made him my brother as much as yours. It’s for his sake I’m come. Rode hard, I did, near killed my horse the way I drove her, but I left the others well behind.”
“大人，派我来的不是别人，是老莫尔蒙。我是来寻找把守长城的人手，等下次劳勃上朝，我就要去卑躬屈膝，跟他说明我们的需要，看看国王和他的首相在他们的地牢里有没有想处理掉的人渣。不过我赶来这儿跟他也有关系。他是黑衫军的一员，我和您一样把他当成兄弟。我正是为了他才飞速赶来，拼了老命，差点把我的马都给累死了，好在也把其他人甩在后面。”
“The others?”
“其他人？”
Yoren spat. “Sellswords and freeriders and like trash. That inn was full o’ them, and I saw them take the scent. The scent of blood or the scent of gold, they smell the same in the end. Not all o’ them made for King’s Landing, either. Some went galloping for Casterly Rock, and the Rock lies closer. Lord Tywin will have gotten the word by now, you can count on it.”
尤伦吐了口口水。“还不就是流浪武士、自由骑手这路货色。整间旅店都是这号人，我看他们是嗅到了好味道。血和黄金的味道，这类人到死都追逐不放。他们没有都往君临来，有些朝凯岩城冲去，而凯岩城比较近，可以想见，如今泰温大人肯定得到了消息。”
Father frowned. “What word is this?”
父亲皱眉。“什么消息？”
Yoren eyed Arya. “One best spoken in private, m’lord, begging your pardons.”
尤伦看了艾莉亚一眼。“大人，请您原谅，这事咱们最好私下谈。”
“As you say. Desmond, see my daughter to her chambers.” He kissed her on the brow. “We’ll finish our talk on the morrow.”
“好吧，戴斯蒙，带我女儿回房。”他吻了她的额头。“我们明天再把话说完。”
Arya stood rooted to the spot. “Nothing bad’s happened to Jon, has it?” she asked Yoren. “Or Uncle Benjen?”
艾莉亚脚像生了根似地赖在原地。“琼恩没事吧？”她问尤伦，“班扬叔叔呢？”
“Well, as to Stark, I can’t say. The Snow boy was well enough when I left the Wall. It’s not them as concerns me.”
“唉，史塔克他怎么样我说不准，不过我从长城出发时，雪诺那小子倒是活得挺自在。我要说的不是他们的事。”
Desmond took her hand. “Come along, milady. You heard your lord father.”
戴斯蒙拉起她的手。“小姐，我们走罢，您也听见您父亲的吩咐了。”
Arya had no choice but to go with him, wishing it had been Fat Tom. With Tom, she might have been able to linger at the door on some excuse and hear what Yoren was saying, but Desmond was too single-minded to trick. “How many guards does my father have?” she asked him as they descended to her bedchamber.
艾莉亚别无选择，只好跟他走，心里好希望他变成胖汤姆。如果是汤姆，她或许就可以找借口在门口多逗留一会儿，然后偷听尤伦要说什么，可戴斯蒙脑筋太直，骗不过的。“我爸爸有多少守卫？”他们走下楼梯，去她卧房时，她问他。
“Here at King’s Landing? Fifty.”
“在君临这儿吗？有五十个。”
“You wouldn’t let anyone kill him, would you?” she asked.
“你不会让别人有机会杀他，对不对？”她问。
Desmond laughed. “No fear on that count, little lady. Lord Eddard’s guarded night and day. He’ll come to no harm.”
戴斯蒙笑道：“小姐您别担心，艾德大人他日夜都有人守着，谁也动不了他的。”
“The Lannisters have more than fifty men,” Arya pointed out.
“可兰尼斯特家的人不只五十个。”艾莉亚指出。
“So they do, but every northerner is worth ten of these southron swords, so you can sleep easy.”
“多是多，可咱北方人一个人抵得上南方人十个，所以你就安心地睡吧。”
“What if a wizard was sent to kill him?”
“如果他们叫巫师来杀他呢？”
“Well, as to that,” Desmond replied, drawing his longsword, “wizards die the same as other men, once you cut their heads off.”
“唉，这个嘛，”戴斯蒙边说边抽出长剑。“只要砍掉脑袋，巫师一样会没命。”
*EDDARD
第三十四章 艾德
“R obert, I beg of you,” Ned pleaded, “hear what you are saying. You are talking of murdering a child.”
“劳勃，求求你，”奈德恳求，“请你仔细想清楚，你这是谋害幼儿啊！”
“The whore is pregnant!” The king’s fist slammed down on the council table loud as a thunderclap. “I warned you this would happen, Ned. Back in the barrowlands, I warned you, but you did not care to hear it. Well, you’ll hear it now. I want them dead, mother and child both, and that fool Viserys as well. Is that plain enough for you? I want them dead.”
“那贱货怀孕了！”国王重重一拳捶在议事桌上，声响如雷。“奈德，这事我早警告过你，记得吗？还在荒冢地的时候我就说过，可你不肯听。那好，现在你给我听清楚：我要他们死，母子两个一起死，外加那个笨蛋韦赛里斯。这样说够明白了吧？我要他们死。”
The other councillors were all doing their best to pretend that they were somewhere else. No doubt they were wiser than he was. Eddard Stark had seldom felt quite so alone. “You will dishonor yourself forever if you do this.”
其余重臣正竭尽所能假装不在现场。他们这么做，无疑比他聪明得多。艾德·史塔克极少感到如此孤独。“假如你真这样做，你将遗臭万年。”
“Then let it be on my head, so long as it is done. I am not so blind that I cannot see the shadow of the axe when it is hanging over my own neck.”
“要怪就尽量怪到我头上来吧，只要事情能办成。我还没盲目到斧头的影子都在脖子上晃了自己还看不到的地步。”
“There is no axe,” Ned told his king. “Only the shadow of a shadow, twenty years removed … if it exists at all.”
“根本没有什么斧头，”奈德告诉他的国王：“只有二十年前的陈年旧事，你这是在捕风捉影……而且究竟有没有影子还未可知。”
“If?” Varys asked softly, wringing powdered hands together. “My lord, you wrong me. Would I bring lies to king and council?”
“还未可知？”瓦里斯轻声问，一边扭着他那双洒满香粉的手。“大人，您错怪我了。难道我会编造假消息来欺骗国王陛下和诸位大人吗？”
Ned looked at the eunuch coldly. “You would bring us the whisperings of a traitor half a world away, my lord. Perhaps Mormont is wrong. Perhaps he is lying.”
奈德冷冷地看着太监。“大人，您的消息来源于千里之外的叛徒。或许莫尔蒙弄错了，或许他在撒谎。”
“Ser Jorah would not dare deceive me,” Varys said with a sly smile. “Rely on it, my lord. The princess is with child.”
“乔拉爵士想必不敢骗我，”瓦里斯露出狡猾的笑容。“请放心吧，大人，公主怀孕的事不会错的。”
“So you say. If you are wrong, we need not fear. If the girl miscarries, we need not fear. If she births a daughter in place of a son, we need not fear. If the babe dies in infancy, we need not fear.”
“这可是你说的。若你弄错了，我们无须害怕；若那女孩流产，我们无须害怕；若她生的是女儿，并非儿子，我们无须害怕；若那孩子还未长大就死于襁褓，我们也无须害怕。”
“But if it is a boy?” Robert insisted. “If he lives?”
“但万一真是个儿子呢？”劳勃坚持，“万一他活下来了呢？”
“The narrow sea would still lie between us. I shall fear the Dothraki the day they teach their horses to run on water.”
“狭海依旧隔在中间。等多斯拉克人教会他们的马在水上走路的那一天，我才会害怕。”
The king took a swallow of wine and glowered at Ned across the council table. “So you would counsel me to do nothing until the dragonspawn has landed his army on my shores, is that it?”
国王灌了口葡萄酒，然后从议事桌的那边狠狠地瞪着这一头的奈德。“你的意思就是让我什么也别做，干等恶龙的孽种带着兵马登岸了再说，是吗？”
“This ‘dragonspawn’ is in his mother’s belly,” Ned said. “Even Aegon did no conquering until after he was weaned.”
“您说的这个‘恶龙的孽种’，如今还在娘胎里，”奈德道，“即便是伊耿，也是等断奶之后才南征北讨的。”
“Gods! You are stubborn as an aurochs, Stark.” The king looked around the council table. “Have the rest of you mislaid your tongues? Will no one talk sense to this frozen-faced fool?”
“诸神在上！史塔克，你老是这副牛脾气！”国王环顾议事桌。“怎么，都哑巴啦？谁来跟这冻糊涂了的傻瓜讲讲道理？”
Varys gave the king an unctuous smile and laid a soft hand on Ned’s sleeve. “I understand your qualms, Lord Eddard, truly I do. It gave me no joy to bring this grievous news to council. It is a terrible thing we contemplate, a vile thing. Yet we who presume to rule must do vile things for the good of the realm, howevermuch it pains us.”
瓦里斯朝国王腻腻一笑，然后伸出软绵绵的手放在奈德的袖子上。“艾德大人，凭良心说，我真的能体会您的顾虑。将这消息带给诸位，我自己也不好受。我们讨论的是件可怕的事，是件卑鄙的事，可我们这些冒昧为政的人，凡事必须以全国百姓福祉为优先考量，而不论自身感受如何。”
Lord Renly shrugged. “The matter seems simple enough to me. We ought to have had Viserys and his sister killed years ago, but His Grace my brother made the mistake of listening to Jon Arryn.”
蓝礼公爵耸肩：“对我来说，这事很简单。韦赛里斯和他妹妹早就该杀，只怪王兄陛下从前错信了琼恩·艾林的话。”
“Mercy is never a mistake, Lord Renly,” Ned replied. “On the Trident, Ser Barristan here cut down a dozen good men, Robert’s friends and mine. When they brought him to us, grievously wounded and near death, Roose Bolton urged us to cut his throat, but your brother said, ‘I will not kill a man for loyalty, nor for fighting well,’ and sent his own maester to tend Ser Barristan’s wounds.” He gave the king a long cool look. “Would that man were here today.”
“蓝礼大人，慈悲为怀绝不是错误。”奈德答道，“当年在三叉戟河上，眼下在座的巴利斯坦爵士独自一人砍倒十几个优秀的勇士，其中有的是劳勃的朋友，有的是我的。当他被押到我们面前时，已经浑身是伤，濒临死亡，卢斯·波顿力主割了他喉咙，但你哥哥却说：‘我不会因为一个人忠心耿耿、英勇作战而杀他。’随后他派出自己的学士为巴利斯坦疗伤。”他冰冷却意味深长地看了国王一眼。“如果今天在场的是那个人就好了。”
Robert had shame enough to blush. “It was not the same,” he complained. “Ser Barristan was a knight of the Kingsguard.”
劳勃还知道红脸。“那不一样，”他抱怨，“巴利斯坦爵士是御林铁卫的骑士。”
“Whereas Daenerys is a fourteen-year-old girl.” Ned knew he was pushing this well past the point of wisdom, yet he could not keep silent. “Robert, I ask you, what did we rise against Aerys Targaryen for, if not to put an end to the murder of children?”
“而丹妮莉丝只是个十四岁的小女孩。”奈德知道这样步步进逼很不理智，然而他无法保持缄默。“劳勃，我问你，当初我们兴兵对抗伊里斯·坦格利安，不就是为了要阻止他继续谋害孩童吗？”
“To put an end to Targaryens!” the king growled.
“我们是要杀光坦格利安家的人！”国王咆哮。
“Your Grace, I never knew you to fear Rhaegar.” Ned fought to keep the scorn out of his voice, and failed. “Have the years so unmanned you that you tremble at the shadow of an unborn child?”
“陛下，记得从前连雷加也吓不倒你，”奈德努力克制口气中的轻蔑，却失败了。“难道经过这么些年，您的胆子却变得如此之小，连个还未出生的孩子的阴影都能让您颤抖了么？”
Robert purpled. “No more, Ned,” he warned, pointing. “Not another word. Have you forgotten who is king here?”
劳勃脸色发紫。“奈德，不要再说了。”他指着他发出警告，“一个字都不许再说。莫非你忘了谁才是国王？”
“No, Your Grace,” Ned replied. “Have you?”
“启禀陛下，我没忘。”奈德回答，“敢情您也没忘吧？”
“Enough!” the king bellowed. “I am sick of talk. I’ll be done with this, or be damned. What say you all?”
“够了！”国王大吼，“我懒得再费口舌。我要是不杀她，必遭天谴。你们意见如何？”
“She must be killed,” Lord Renly declared.
“该杀。”蓝礼公爵表示。
“We have no choice,” murmured Varys. “Sadly, sadly …”
“我们别无选择，”瓦里斯喃喃道，“可惜啊，可惜……”
Ser Barristan Selmy raised his pale blue eyes from the table and said, “Your Grace, there is honor in facing an enemy on the battlefield, but none in killing him in his mother’s womb. Forgive me, but I must stand with Lord Eddard.”
巴利斯坦·赛尔弥爵士从桌上扬起那双淡蓝色的眼睛，“陛下，在战场上与敌人交锋是件光荣的事，但人还没出生就动手却不光彩。请您原谅，我必须站在艾德大人这边。”
Grand Maester Pycelle cleared his throat, a process that seemed to take some minutes. “My order serves the realm, not the ruler. Once I counseled King Aerys as loyally as I counsel King Robert now, so I bear this girl child of his no ill will. Yet I ask you this—should war come again, how many soldiers will die? How many towns will burn? How many children will be ripped from their mothers to perish on the end of a spear?” He stroked his luxuriant white beard, infinitely sad, infinitely weary. “Is it not wiser, even kinder , that Daenerys Targaryen should die now so that tens of thousands might live?”
派席尔大学士花了好几分钟清喉咙。“我的组织旨在为全国谋福利，而非只为统治者。我曾经忠心耿耿地辅佐伊里斯国王，一如我现在辅佐劳勃国王，所以我对他这个女儿没有恶感。但是我请问您——倘若战事再起，会有多少士兵丧命荒野？多少村庄付之一炬？多少孩子被从母亲怀里硬生生抓走，死于枪下？”他捻捻大把白胡须，一副悲天悯人、疲累不堪的模样。“倘若死了丹妮莉丝一个，能够拯救万千生灵，那会不会是比较明智，甚或比较仁慈的做法呢？”
“Kinder,” Varys said. “Oh, well and truly spoken, Grand Maester. It is so true. Should the gods in their caprice grant Daenerys Targaryen a son, the realm must bleed.”
“比较仁慈，”瓦里斯道，“噢，国师大人，说得真好，实在是再正确不过了。的确如此啊，若是天上诸神一个疏忽，给了丹妮莉丝·坦格利安一个儿子，王国就难免血光之灾。”
Littlefinger was the last. As Ned looked to him, Lord Petyr stifled a yawn. “When you find yourself in bed with an ugly woman, the best thing to do is close your eyes and get on with it,” he declared. “Waiting won’t make the maid any prettier. Kiss her and be done with it.”
小指头最后发言。奈德朝他望去时，培提尔伯爵正忍住呵欠。“若你发现跟自己上床的原来是个丑女，最好的做法就是闭上眼睛，赶紧办事。”他高声宣布，“反正等下去她也不会变漂亮，所以还是亲一亲了事啰。”
“Kiss her?” Ser Barristan repeated, aghast.
“亲一亲？”巴利斯坦爵士骇然地重复。
“A steel kiss,” said Littlefinger.
“用刀用剑亲哪。”小指头道。
Robert turned to face his Hand. “Well, there it is, Ned. You and Selmy stand alone on this matter. The only question that remains is, who can we find to kill her?”
劳勃转身面对他的首相。“你看，奈德，就这样了。对这件事的看法，只有你和赛尔弥持有异议。剩下的问题是，我们派谁去杀她？”
“Mormont craves a royal pardon,” Lord Renly reminded them.
“莫尔蒙极度渴望王家特赦。”蓝礼提醒他们。
“Desperately,” Varys said, “yet he craves life even more. By now, the princess nears Vaes Dothrak, where it is death to draw a blade. If I told you what the Dothraki would do to the poor man who used one on a khaleesi , none of you would sleep tonight.” He stroked a powdered cheek. “Now, poison … the tears of Lys, let us say. Khal Drogo need never know it was not a natural death.”
“一心一意哪，”瓦里斯道，“但他更渴望生命。如今公主已抵达维斯·多斯拉克，在那里拔剑可是会没命的。若有哪个笨蛋敢在圣城对卡丽熙动刀动枪，他会有什么下场，我要是说出来，各位今晚就不用睡了。”他轻抚扑过粉的脸颊。“除此之外，就是下毒……不如就用里斯之泪。没必要让卓戈卡奥知道是否是自然死亡。”
Grand Maester Pycelle’s sleepy eyes flicked open. He squinted suspiciously at the eunuch.
派席尔国师昏昏欲睡的眼睛登时睁得老大，他一脸怀疑地眯眼看着太监。
“Poison is a coward’s weapon,” the king complained.
“毒药是懦夫的武器。”国王抱怨。
Ned had heard enough. “You send hired knives to kill a fourteen-year-old girl and still quibble about honor?” He pushed back his chair and stood. “Do it yourself, Robert. The man who passes the sentence should swing the sword. Look her in the eyes before you kill her. See her tears, hear her last words. You owe her that much at least.”
奈德受够了。“你雇人去杀一个十四岁的小女孩，还嫌手段不够光明正大？”他把椅子往后一推，站起来。“劳勃，您亲自动手罢。判人死刑的应该亲自操刀，杀她之前好好注视她的眼睛，看她流泪，聆听她的临终遗言，最起码您应该做到这样。”
“Gods,” the king swore, the word exploding out of him as if he could barely contain his fury. “You mean it, damn you.” He reached for the flagon of wine at his elbow, found it empty, and flung it away to shatter against the wall. “I am out of wine and out of patience. Enough of this. Just have it done.”
“诸神在上，”国王咒道。这句话从他嘴里炸出来，仿佛他几乎无法包容怒气。“该死，你真想跟我作对吗？”他伸手拿起肘边的酒壶，却发现是空的，便狠狠将之朝墙上摔去。“我的酒没了，耐性也没了，别再婆婆妈妈，快把事情办妥吧。”
“I will not be part of murder, Robert. Do as you will, but do not ask me to fix my seal to it.”
“劳勃，我决不当谋杀共犯。您要怎么随便您，但休想叫我在上面盖印。”
For a moment Robert did not seem to understand what Ned was saying. Defiance was not a dish he tasted often. Slowly his face changed as comprehension came. His eyes narrowed and a flush crept up his neck past the velvet collar. He pointed an angry finger at Ned. “You are the King’s Hand, Lord Stark. You will do as I command you, or I’ll find me a Hand who will.”
起初劳勃似乎没听懂奈德的话，他很少尝到被人抗拒的滋味。等他明白过来之后，慢慢变了脸色。他眯起眼睛，一阵红晕爬上脖子，高过天鹅绒领口。他愤怒地伸手指着奈德道：“史塔克大人，你是御前首相，你要么照我说的去做，不然我就另请高明。”
“I wish him every success.” Ned unfastened the heavy clasp that clutched at the folds of his cloak, the ornate silver hand that was his badge of office. He laid it on the table in front of the king, saddened by the memory of the man who had pinned it on him, the friend he had loved. “I thought you a better man than this, Robert. I thought we had made a nobler king.”
“那我祝他胜任愉快。”奈德说罢解开扣住斗篷、象征他身份地位的雕花银手徽章。他把徽章放在国王面前的桌上，想起那个为自己配上这枚徽章的人，那个他所深爱的朋友，不禁难过起来。“劳勃，我以为您不是这种人。我以为我们拥立了一个更高贵的国王。”
Robert’s face was purple. “Out,” he croaked, choking on his rage. “Out, damn you, I’m done with you. What are you waiting for? Go, run back to Winterfell. And make certain I never look on your face again, or I swear, I’ll have your head on a spike!”
劳勃脸色发紫。“给我滚！”他嘶声道，气得差点说不出话。“快给我滚出去，你这该死的家伙，我受够你了。你还等什么？滚，快滚回临冬城去。你这辈子最好再也别叫我瞧见你那张脸，否则……否则我发誓一定把你的头砍下来挂在枪上。”
Ned bowed, and turned on his heel without another word. He could feel Robert’s eyes on his back. As he strode from the council chambers, the discussion resumed with scarcely a pause. “On Braavos there is a society called the Faceless Men,” Grand Maester Pycelle offered.
奈德鞠躬，然后一言不发地离开。他感觉得到劳勃的目光看着自己的背。他还没走出议事厅，讨论便继续进行。“听说布拉佛斯有个叫‘无面者’的组织。”派席尔大学士提议。
“Do you have any idea how costly they are?” Littlefinger complained. “You could hire an army of common sellswords for half the price, and that’s for a merchant. I don’t dare think what they might ask for a princess.”
“你到底知不知道他们的行情？”小指头抱怨：“光半价就够你雇一支寻常佣兵组成的军队，而且行刺对象只是寻常商人。暗杀公主要花多少，我连想都不敢想。”
The closing of the door behind him silenced the voices. Ser Boros Blount was stationed outside the chamber, wearing the long white cloak and armor of the Kingsguard. He gave Ned a quick, curious glance from the corner of his eye, but asked no questions.
门在他身后关上，隔绝了声音。柏洛斯·布劳恩爵士守在议事厅外，穿着御林铁卫的纯白长披风和铠甲。他用眼角飞快又狐疑地瞄了奈德一眼，但没有多问。
The day felt heavy and oppressive as he crossed the bailey back to the Tower of the Hand. He could feel the threat of rain in the air. Ned would have welcomed it. It might have made him feel a trifle less unclean. When he reached his solar, he summoned Vayon Poole. The steward came at once. “You sent for me, my lord Hand?”
天色阴沉而压抑，奈德穿过城堡外庭，回到首相塔。他感觉得出空气中弥漫湿意，仿佛山雨欲来，若真下起雨，他倒会很高兴，或许一场雨，会让他稍稍觉得自己不那么污秽。他进了书房，传维扬·普尔过去。总管立刻赶来。“首相大人，您有何吩咐？”
“Hand no longer,” Ned told him. “The king and I have quarreled. We shall be returning to Winterfell.”
“我已经不是首相了。”奈德告诉他，“我跟国王吵了一架。我们准备回临冬城。”
“I shall begin making arrangements at once, my lord. We will need a fortnight to ready everything for the journey.”
“那我这就去准备，老爷。我们需要两个星期的时间安排旅途。”
“We may not have a fortnight. We may not have a day. The king mentioned something about seeing my head on a spike.” Ned frowned. He did not truly believe the king would harm him, not Robert. He was angry now, but once Ned was safely out of sight, his rage would cool as it always did.
“只怕我们没有两个星期，连有没有一天我都不敢确定。国王甚至说要把我的头挂在枪上。”奈德皱眉。他并不真正相信国王会伤害他，劳勃绝对不会。他当时在气头上，但等奈德离开他的视线，他的怒意自会冷却，从前每次都这样。
Suddenly, uncomfortably, he found himself recalling Rhaegar Targaryen. Fifteen years dead, yet Robert hates him as much as ever . It was a disturbing notion … and there was the other matter, the business with Catelyn and the dwarf that Yoren had warned him of last night. That would come to light soon, as sure as sunrise, and with the king in such a black fury … Robert might not care a fig for Tyrion Lannister, but it would touch on his pride, and there was no telling what the queen might do.
每次都是吗？突然间，他不安地发觉自己想起了雷加·坦格利安。都死了十五年了，劳勃还像当初那么恨他。这念头真叫他心烦意乱……还有别的麻烦事，首当其冲就是昨晚尤伦警告他的凯特琳和那侏儒的纠纷。不消说，这消息很快就会传开，国王现在又气成这样……劳勃或许不在乎提利昂·兰尼斯特死活，但此事触及他的自尊，更别提王后方面会有什么举动。
“It might be safest if I went on ahead,” he told Poole. “I will take my daughters and a few guardsmen. The rest of you can follow when you are ready. Inform Jory, but tell no one else, and do nothing until the girls and I have gone. The castle is full of eyes and ears, and I would rather my plans were not known.”
“看来我提前动身会比较安全，”他告诉普尔，“我就带女儿和几个侍卫先走，你们其他人等准备好了再跟上。将消息通知乔里，但别让其他人知道，在我和我女儿离开以前，也不要有任何动作。城堡里到处是监视的眼线，我不希望自己的计划泄漏出去。”
“As you command, my lord.”
“老爷，依您吩咐。”
When he had gone, Eddard Stark went to the window and sat brooding. Robert had left him no choice that he could see. He ought to thank him. It would be good to return to Winterfell. He ought never have left. His sons were waiting there. Perhaps he and Catelyn would make a new son together when he returned, they were not so old yet. And of late he had often found himself dreaming of snow, of the deep quiet of the wolfswood at night.
他走后，艾德·史塔克踱到窗边，坐下来沉思。是劳勃让他别无选择。其实他倒该感谢他，能回临冬城是件好事，他打一开始便不该离开。儿子们都在那儿等他。回去以后，他说不定可以跟凯特琳再生个儿子，他们都还不老呢。近来他时常梦见雪，以及狼林夜间深沉的静谧。
And yet, the thought of leaving angered him as well. So much was still undone. Robert and his council of cravens and flatterers would beggar the realm if left unchecked … or, worse, sell it to the Lannisters in payment of their loans. And the truth of Jon Arryn’s death still eluded him. Oh, he had found a few pieces, enough to convince him that Jon had indeed been murdered, but that was no more than the spoor of an animal on the forest floor. He had not sighted the beast itself yet, though he sensed it was there, lurking, hidden, treacherous.
可另一方面，想到离开却又叫他恼怒。好多事都还未完成。若不加以管束，劳勃和他满朝的懦夫和马屁精会闹得民穷国枯……甚至可能为了还债，把国家都卖给兰尼斯特。至于琼恩·艾林的死亡之谜，则始终困扰着他。噢，他的确找到些线索，足以让他相信琼恩确是遭人谋害，但那不过是林中野兽留下的一鳞半爪。他还未亲眼目睹野兽本身，然而他感觉得到，它就在那里，潜伏、躲藏、狡诈。
It struck him suddenly that he might return to Winterfell by sea. Ned was no sailor, and ordinarily would have preferred the kingsroad, but if he took ship he could stop at Dragonstone and speak with Stannis Baratheon. Pycelle had sent a raven off across the water, with a polite letter from Ned requesting Lord Stannis to return to his seat on the small council. As yet, there had been no reply, but the silence only deepened his suspicions. Lord Stannis shared the secret Jon Arryn had died for, he was certain of it. The truth he sought might very well be waiting for him on the ancient island fortress of House Targaryen.
他突然想到，或许自己应该走海路回临冬城。奈德不谙水性，正常状况下宁可走国王大道，但他若是乘船，则可在龙石岛停靠，和史坦尼斯·拜拉席恩谈谈。派席尔已经送了只乌鸦飞越狭海，带上奈德的一封信，信中礼貌地请求史坦尼斯公爵回到朝中奉职，却至今没有回音。对方的沉默只加深了他的怀疑。史坦尼斯一定知道琼恩·艾林何以丧命的秘密，这点他很确定。他所冀求的事实真相，很可能就在坦格利安家族的古老岛屿要塞里等着他。
And when you have it, what then? Some secrets are safer kept hidden. Some secrets are too dangerous to share, even with those you love and trust . Ned slid the dagger that Catelyn had brought him out of the sheath on his belt. The Imp’s knife. Why would the dwarf want Bran dead? To silence him, surely. Another secret, or only a different strand of the same web?
就算你查出真相，又能怎么样呢？有些秘密最好永远埋藏，有些秘密太危险，不能与他人分享，即便是那些你所深爱和相信的人。奈德从腰际的刀鞘里抽出凯特琳带来的那把匕首。小恶魔的刀。那侏儒为何会要置布兰于死地？想必是为了叫他永远闭嘴。这是又一个秘密，还是同一张蛛网上不同的丝线？
Could Robert be part of it? He would not have thought so, but once he would not have thought Robert could command the murder of women and children either. Catelyn had tried to warn him. You knew the man , she had said. The king is a stranger to you . The sooner he was quit of King’s Landing, the better. If there was a ship sailing north on the morrow, it would be well to be on it.
这其中劳勃有份吗？他不会这么想，但从前他也不会想到劳勃竟干得出谋害妇孺的事。凯特琳警告过他，你清楚的是过去的他。当时她说，现在的国王对你而言，已经成了陌生人。看来他越快离开君临越好，假如明天刚好有北上的船只，能搭上是再好不过。
He summoned Vayon Poole again and sent him to the docks to make inquiries, quietly but quickly. “Find me a fast ship with a skilled captain,” he told the steward. “I care nothing for the size of its cabins or the quality of its appointments, so long as it is swift and safe. I wish to leave at once.”
于是他再次找来维扬·普尔，吩咐他去港口询问，不能张扬但动作要快。“帮我找条快船，得有经验丰富的船长。”他告诉管家，“我不在乎船舱大小或豪华与否，只要迅速安全就成。我打算即刻动身。”
Poole had no sooner taken his leave than Tomard announced a visitor. “Lord Baelish to see you, m’lord.”
普尔刚奉命离开，托马德便宣告有访客到来。“大人，贝里席大人想见您。”
Ned was half-tempted to turn him away, but thought better of it. He was not free yet; until he was, he must play their games. “Show him in, Tom.”
奈德很想把他赶走，但最后还是作罢。他还未脱身，在重获自由之前，必须照他们的游戏规则来玩。“汤姆，请他进来吧。”
Lord Petyr sauntered into the solar as if nothing had gone amiss that morning. He wore a slashed velvet doublet in cream-and-silver, a grey silk cloak trimmed with black fox, and his customary mocking smile.
培提尔伯爵若无其事地踱进书房，浑若上午无事发生。他穿了件乳白和银色相间的天鹅绒上衣，以及滚着黑狐狸皮边的灰色丝披风，脸上则挂着一惯的嘲弄笑容。
Ned greeted him coldly. “Might I ask the reason for this visit, Lord Baelish?”
奈德冷淡地问候他：“贝里席大人，请问您此次来访有何目的？”
“I won’t detain you long, I’m on my way to dine with Lady Tanda. Lamprey pie and roast suckling pig. She has some thought to wed me to her younger daughter, so her table is always astonishing. If truth be told, I’d sooner marry the pig, but don’t tell her. I do love lamprey pie.”
“我不会打扰您太久的，我正要去参加坦妲伯爵夫人安排的晚餐，这是碰巧路过。七鳃鳗派和烤乳猪。她有意把小女儿嫁给我，所以桌上的菜总是很出彩。不过说实话，我还宁愿娶头猪。噢，这事可别告诉她，我可是真心喜欢鳗鱼派哪。”
“Don’t let me keep you from your eels, my lord,” Ned said with icy disdain. “At the moment, I cannot think of anyone whose company I desire less than yours.”
“大人，那就别让我耽误了你的鳗鱼美食。”奈德带着冷冷的嫌恶道，“此时此刻，我想不出还有谁更让我不愿与之为伍。”
“Oh, I’m certain if you put your mind to it, you could come up with a few names. Varys, say. Cersei. Or Robert. His Grace is most wroth with you. He went on about you at some length after you took your leave of us this morning. The words insolence and ingratitude came into it frequently, I seem to recall.”
“噢，我相信你只要努力想，一定可以想出几个。比方说，瓦里斯，瑟曦，或是劳勃。陛下他很生你的气，今早上你走之后，他还接着骂了一通。倘若我没记错的话，他的话中反复出现傲慢无礼、忘恩负义这些字眼哟。”
Ned did not honor that with a reply. Nor did he offer his guest a seat, but Littlefinger took one anyway. “After you stormed out, it was left to me to convince them not to hire the Faceless Men,” he continued blithely. “Instead Varys will quietly let it be known that we’ll make a lord of whoever does in the Targaryen girl.”
奈德根本不屑回答，也不打算请来客落座。不过小指头倒是大咧咧地主动坐了下来。“在你发完脾气后，就只剩下我来打消他们雇用无面者的念头。”他开心地续道，“还好收回了成命，只是让瓦里斯悄悄放出消息，谁做掉坦格利安家那女孩，我们就封谁当贵族。”
Ned was disgusted. “So now we grant titles to assassins.”
奈德觉得恶心透顶。“所以我们要让刺客当贵族了。”
Littlefinger shrugged. “Titles are cheap. The Faceless Men are expensive. If truth be told, I did the Targaryen girl more good than you with all your talk of honor. Let some sellsword drunk on visions of lordship try to kill her. Likely he’ll make a botch of it, and afterward the Dothraki will be on their guard. If we’d sent a Faceless Man after her, she’d be as good as buried.”
小指头耸耸肩。“反正封号挺便宜，无面者却花消不起。说实话，比起你满嘴仁义道德，我帮坦格利安家那女孩的忙是不是还要大些？就让哪个满脑子贵族梦的佣兵喝醉酒去杀杀看吧，八成会失手，往后多斯拉克人定会多加提防。假如我们派去的是无面者，那他们就只能收尸了。”
Ned frowned. “You sit in council and talk of ugly women and steel kisses, and now you expect me to believe that you tried to protect the girl? How big a fool do you take me for?”
奈德皱眉。“我可没忘，你在会议上说到丑女和‘亲吻’，到现在你反过来指望我相信你是在想办法保护那女孩？你把我当大白痴了？”
“Well, quite an enormous one, actually,” said Littlefinger, laughing.
“这个嘛，事实上，你是个笨透了的大白痴。”小指头笑道。
“Do you always find murder so amusing, Lord Baelish?”
“贝里席大人，敢问你觉得谋杀之事如此有趣？”
“It’s not murder I find amusing, Lord Stark, it’s you. You rule like a man dancing on rotten ice. I daresay you will make a noble splash. I believe I heard the first crack this morning.”
“史塔克大人，我觉得有趣的不是谋杀，而是你。你办起事来还真是如履薄冰，我敢说你总有一天会啪啦一声摔下去的。我相信今儿早上我已经听到第一次开裂的声音啦。”
“The first and last,” said Ned. “I’ve had my fill.”
“这是第一次，也是最后一次。”奈德道，“我受够了。”
“When do you mean to return to Winterfell, my lord?”
“大人，请问您打算什么时候回临冬城啊？”
“As soon as I can. What concern is that of yours?”
“越快越好。此事与你何干？”
“None … but if perchance you’re still here come evenfall, I’d be pleased to take you to this brothel your man Jory has been searching for so ineffectually.” Littlefinger smiled. “And I won’t even tell the Lady Catelyn.”
“与我无关……不过明天傍晚您若碰巧还留在城里，我倒是很乐意带您去那家您的手下乔里遍寻不着的妓院。”小指头微笑，“这件事我连凯特琳也不会说。”
*CATELYN
第三十五章 凯特琳
“M y lady, you should have sent word of your coming,” Ser Donnel Waynwood told her as their horses climbed the pass. “We would have sent an escort. The high road is not as safe as it once was, for a party as small as yours.”
“夫人，您应该先捎个信来，”他们骑马爬上山口，唐纳尔·韦伍德爵士对她说，“那样的话，我们就可以派人护送。这年头山路的安全不比从前，更何况您只带了这么点人。”
“We learned that to our sorrow, Ser Donnel,” Catelyn said. Sometimes she felt as though her heart had turned to stone; six brave men had died to bring her this far, and she could not even find it in her to weep for them. Even their names were fading. “The clansmen harried us day and night. We lost three men in the first attack, and two more in the second, and Lannister’s serving man died of a fever when his wounds festered. When we heard your men approaching, I thought us doomed for certain.” They had drawn up for a last desperate fight, blades in hand and backs to the rock. The dwarf had been whetting the edge of his axe and making some mordant jest when Bronn spotted the banner the riders carried before them, the moon-and-falcon of House Arryn, sky-blue and white. Catelyn had never seen a more welcome sight.
“唐纳尔爵士，我们的确是尝到了惨痛的教训。”凯特琳道。有时候她觉得自己铁石心肠。六个英勇的人牺牲了性命，她才能走到这里，然而她却连为他们掬一把泪都做不到。就连他们的名姓，也越来越模糊。“原住民日夜骚扰，我们第一次损失了三个人，后来又死了两个，兰尼斯特的仆人伤口溃烂，死于高烧。听到你手下接近的声音时，我本以为我们完蛋了。”他们决定孤注一掷，手握武器，背靠岩壁。侏儒当时一边磨斧头，一边开着语气辛辣的玩笑，这时波隆首先看到来者高举的旗帜，正是艾林家族的蓝底白色新月猎鹰标志。对凯特琳而言，再也没有比这更受她欢迎的东西了。
“The clans have grown bolder since Lord Jon died,” Ser Donnel said. He was a stocky youth of twenty years, earnest and homely, with a wide nose and a shock of thick brown hair. “If it were up to me, I would take a hundred men into the mountains, root them out of their fastnesses, and teach them some sharp lessons, but your sister has forbidden it. She would not even permit her knights to fight in the Hand’s tourney. She wants all our swords kept close to home, to defend the Vale … against what, no one is certain. Shadows, some say.” He looked at her anxiously, as if he had suddenly remembered who she was. “I hope I have not spoken out of turn, my lady. I meant no offense.”
“琼恩大人死后，这些原住民越来越胆大包天。”唐纳尔爵士道。他是个二十岁的年轻人，体格健壮，长相虽丑但待人诚恳，生了一个宽鼻和一头散乱的棕色粗发。“若是交给我办，我会带上一百精兵深入山区，把他们从窝里赶出来，好好教训一顿，可您妹妹不准。她连放手下骑士参加首相的比武大会都不准。说是要把所有的兵力都留在这儿，守护艾林谷……可谁也不清楚到底是要防备谁。有人说这是在捕风捉影。”他不安地看着她，仿佛突然想起她的身份。“夫人，希望我没说错话。我没有冒犯您的意思。”
“Frank talk does not offend me, Ser Donnel.” Catelyn knew what her sister feared. Not shadows, Lannisters , she thought to herself, glancing back to where the dwarf rode beside Bronn. The two of them had grown thick as thieves since Chiggen had died. The little man was more cunning than she liked. When they had entered the mountains, he had been her captive, bound and helpless. What was he now? Her captive still, yet he rode along with a dirk through his belt and an axe strapped to his saddle, wearing the shadowskin cloak he’d won dicing with the singer and the chainmail hauberk he’d taken off Chiggen’s corpse. Two score men flanked the dwarf and the rest of her ragged band, knights and men-at-arms in service to her sister Lysa and Jon Arryn’s young son, and yet Tyrion betrayed no hint of fear. Could I be wrong? Catelyn wondered, not for the first time. Could he be innocent after all, of Bran and Jon Arryn and all the rest? And if he was, what did that make her? Six men had died to bring him here.
“唐纳尔爵士，实话实说怎么会冒犯到我呢？”凯特琳知道妹妹怕的是什么。不是影子，而是兰尼斯特，她一边想着，一边回头瞄了一眼骑行在波隆身旁的侏儒。自从契根死后，他们俩便成了哥们儿。小个子的精明狡狯，让她颇感不悦，他们刚上山时，他是她的俘虏，五花大绑，求助无门，瞧瞧如今他变成什么样了？虽然依旧是她的囚徒，但骑着马，腰间斜插匕首，鞍上绑着大斧，肩头披了跟那歌手赌骰子赢来的山猫皮披风，身上穿着从契根尸体上取走的锁子甲。二十名骑士和士兵走在侏儒和她残败不堪的队伍两侧，他们都是她妹妹莱莎及琼恩·艾林幼子的忠仆，然而提利昂却连一点畏惧的神色也无。难道他真是无辜？难道他当真与布兰、琼恩·艾林以及其他事情无关？果真如此，那她又是怎么了？为了把他带来这里，六个人丢了性命。
Resolute, she pushed her doubts away. “When we reach your keep, I would take it kindly if you could send for Maester Colemon at once. Ser Rodrik is feverish from his wounds.” More than once she had feared the gallant old knight would not survive the journey. Toward the end he could scarcely sit his horse, and Bronn had urged her to leave him to his fate, but Catelyn would not hear of it. They had tied him in the saddle instead, and she had commanded Marillion the singer to watch over him.
她毅然决然地抛开疑虑。“等我们到了你的要塞，如果你能立刻请柯蒙学士过来，我会非常感激。罗德利克爵士因为伤势的关系，高烧不退。”她不止一次担心这忠勇的老骑士撑不过这趟旅程。末了他已经几乎无法骑马，波隆力劝她任他自生自灭，但凯特琳不听。她反而令他们将他绑在鞍上，并吩咐歌手马瑞里安负责看护。
Ser Donnel hesitated before he answered. “The Lady Lysa has commanded the maester to remain at the Eyrie at all times, to care for Lord Robert,” he said. “We have a septon at the gate who tends to our wounded. He can see to your man’s hurts.”
唐纳尔爵士迟疑半晌才回答。“莱莎夫人下令要学士留在鹰巢城，以便随时照顾劳勃少主。”他说，“不过我们血门要塞有个修士负责处理伤患，他可以替您手下疗伤。”
Catelyn had more faith in a maester’s learning than a septon’s prayers. She was about to say as much when she saw the battlements ahead, long parapets built into the very stone of the mountains on either side of them. Where the pass shrank to a narrow defile scarce wide enough for four men to ride abreast, twin watchtowers clung to the rocky slopes, joined by a covered bridge of weathered grey stone that arched above the road. Silent faces watched from arrow slits in tower, battlements, and bridge. When they had climbed almost to the top, a knight rode out to meet them. His horse and his armor were grey, but his cloak was the rippling blue-and-red of Riverrun, and a shiny black fish, wrought in gold and obsidian, pinned its folds against his shoulder. “Who would pass the Bloody Gate?” he called.
相较于修士的祈祷，凯特琳对学士的医疗知识要有信心得多。她正准备说出心中想法，防御工事便已在前方出现。迤长的城垛建筑在两边危崖上，山路收缩到勉强只容四人并肩骑行，两座瞭望塔攀附于岩壁之上，彼此以一弯饱经风霜的灰石密闭拱桥相连。沉默的脸庞从塔中的射箭孔、城垛和石桥间注视着他们。快到顶端时，一名骑士骑马过来迎接。他的坐骑和铠甲都是灰色，但披风却是奔流城抖擞的蓝红相间图案，一尾用黄金和黑曜石精工打造、闪闪发光的黑鱼镶在他肩头。“是谁要通过血门？”他喊道。
“Ser Donnel Waynwood, with the Lady Catelyn Stark and her companions,” the young knight answered.
“唐纳尔·韦伍德爵士，以及凯特琳夫人和她的同伴。”年轻骑士回答。
The Knight of the Gate lifted his visor. “I thought the lady looked familiar. You are far from home, little Cat.”
血门骑士揭开面罩。“我就觉得眼前这位夫人面熟。小凯特，你离家可真远啊。”
“And you, Uncle,” she said, smiling despite all she had been through. Hearing that hoarse, smoky voice again took her back twenty years, to the days of her childhood.
“叔叔，您不也是？”虽然历经了一切苦难，她还是发自内心地微笑。听见那沙哑、如烟熏般的嗓音，仿佛时光倒流二十年，又把她带回到童年时光。
“My home is at my back,” he said gruffly.
“我的家就在这里。”他粗鲁地说。
“Your home is in my heart,” Catelyn told him. “Take off your helm. I would look on your face again.”
“你的家在我心里。”凯特琳告诉他，“把头盔拿下来，我想再好好看你。”
“The years have not improved it, I fear,” Brynden Tully said, but when he lifted off the helm, Catelyn saw that he lied. His features were lined and weathered, and time had stolen the auburn from his hair and left him only grey, but the smile was the same, and the bushy eyebrows fat as caterpillars, and the laughter in his deep blue eyes. “Did Lysa know you were coming?”
“只怕过了这些年，还是没好看到哪里去。”布林登·徒利虽然这么说，但当他揭起头盔时，凯特琳却认为他撒了谎。他的容貌虽然饱经风霜，岁月偷走了他的红褐头发，只留满头灰白，但他的笑容依旧，肥如毛虫的浓眉依旧，深邃蓝眼中的笑意依旧。“莱莎知道你要来吗？”
“There was no time to send word ahead,” Catelyn told him. The others were coming up behind her. “I fear we ride before the storm, Uncle.”
“我们事先来不及通知。”凯特琳告诉他。这时其他人也跟了上来。“叔叔，只怕风暴在我身后穷追不舍。”
“May we enter the Vale?” Ser Donnel asked. The Waynwoods were ever ones for ceremony.
“我们能进峡谷吗？”唐纳尔爵士问。韦伍德家的人向来讲究礼仪。
“In the name of Robert Arryn, Lord of the Eyrie, Defender of the Vale, True Warden of the East, I bid you enter freely, and charge you to keep his peace,” Ser Brynden replied. “Come.”
“以鹰巢城公爵、艾林谷守护者、真正的东境守护劳勃·艾林之名，我让你们通过，并要求你们以他之名维持和平。”布林登爵士回答，“走吧。”
And so she rode behind him, beneath the shadow of the Bloody Gate where a dozen armies had dashed themselves to pieces in the Age of Heroes. On the far side of the stoneworks, the mountains opened up suddenly upon a vista of green fields, blue sky, and snowcapped mountains that took her breath away. The Vale of Arryn bathed in the morning light.
于是她骑马跟在他身边，穿过血门的阴影。英雄纪元时期，无数兵马命丧于此，却依然无法攻克峡谷。石砌工事彼端，峰峦骤然展开，绿野、蓝天和白雪皑皑的山尖骤然呈现，美得让她喘不过气。此刻，艾林谷正沐浴在晨光之中。
It stretched before them to the misty east, a tranquil land of rich black soil, wide slow-moving rivers, and hundreds of small lakes that shone like mirrors in the sun, protected on all sides by its sheltering peaks. Wheat and corn and barley grew high in its fields, and even in Highgarden the pumpkins were no larger nor the fruit any sweeter than here. They stood at the western end of the valley, where the high road crested the last pass and began its winding descent to the bottomlands two miles below. The Vale was narrow here, no more than a half day’s ride across, and the northern mountains seemed so close that Catelyn could almost reach out and touch them. Looming over them all was the jagged peak called the Giant’s Lance, a mountain that even mountains looked up to, its head lost in icy mists three and a half miles above the valley floor. Over its massive western shoulder flowed the ghost torrent of Alyssa’s Tears. Even from this distance, Catelyn could make out the shining silver thread, bright against the dark stone.
峡谷在他们面前绵延，直至氤氲弥漫的东方，这乃是一个祥和恬静的国度，四面受群山庇护，内中是肥沃的黑土，宽阔而舒缓的河川，还有在阳光下明亮如镜、数以百计的大小湖泊。田野间大麦、小麦和玉米结实累累，就连高庭所生产的南瓜也不比这里硕大，水果更不及此地甜美。他们走进峡谷西端，通过最后一道山口后，道路便开始蜿蜒向下，直至足足两里高的山脚下。此处峡谷甚窄，不需半日即可穿越，北边的山脉近在咫尺，凯特琳仿佛伸手可及。此地最高的山被称做“巨人之枪”，重重山脉都仰之弥高，它的山尖离地三里半，消失在冰冷的雾气之中。“阿莱莎之泪”幽魂般的激流自其高耸的西峦贯穿而下，即使距离如此遥远，凯特琳也分辨得出那条闪亮的银丝带，与暗色的磐石对比鲜明。
When her uncle saw that she had stopped, he moved his horse closer and pointed. “It’s there, beside Alyssa’s Tears. All you can see from here is a flash of white every now and then, if you look hard and the sun hits the walls just right.”
叔叔看见她停了下来，便策马靠过来指给她看。“就在那里，阿莱莎之泪旁边，如果你看得够仔细，阳光又恰好照到城墙，就能见到闪现的白光。”
Seven towers , Ned had told her, like white daggers thrust into the belly of the sky, so high you can stand on the parapets and look down on the clouds . “How long a ride?” she asked.
七座高塔，奈德曾经告诉她，如纯白的匕首刺进苍天的肚腹，耸立云天，站在城垛上，云层都在你脚下。“要走多久？”她问。
“We can be at the mountain by evenfall,” Uncle Brynden said, “but the climb will take another day.”
“今天傍晚我们可以抵达山下，”布林登叔叔道，“但上山还要再花去一天的时间。”
Ser Rodrik Cassel spoke up from behind. “My lady,” he said, “I fear I can go no farther today.” His face sagged beneath his ragged, new-grown whiskers, and he looked so weary Catelyn feared he might fall off his horse.
后面的罗德利克·凯索爵士开了口，“夫人，”他说，“恐怕我今天没法再走下去。”他的脸塌成一团，新长的胡子参差不齐，看来非常虚弱，凯特琳真担心他会跌下马。
“Nor should you,” she said. “You have done all I could have asked of you, and a hundred times more. My uncle will see me the rest of the way to the Eyrie. Lannister must come with me, but there is no reason that you and the others should not rest here and recover your strength.”
“你本不该再走。”她说，“我所要求你做的，你不但尽数办到，还大大超出我的期望。我叔叔会陪我上鹰巢城，兰尼斯特必须跟我走，但你和其他人没有理由不留在这里好好休息，恢复元气。”
“We should be honored to have them to guest,” Ser Donnel said with the grave courtesy of the young. Beside Ser Rodrik, only Bronn, Ser Willis Wode, and Marillion the singer remained of the party that had ridden with her from the inn by the crossroads.
“能招待他们作为宾客是我们的荣幸。”年轻的唐纳尔爵士努力严肃而依礼地说。除了罗德利克爵士，当初跟她一起从路口旅店出发的人，如今只剩波隆、维里·渥德爵士和歌手马瑞里安。
“My lady,” Marillion said, riding forward. “I beg you allow me to accompany you to the Eyrie, to see the end of the tale as I saw its beginnings.” The boy sounded haggard, yet strangely determined; he had a fevered shine to his eyes.
“夫人，”马瑞里安驱骑向前，“请您允许我也陪伴您到鹰巢城去，我看到了故事的开头，也想看看故事怎么结束。”男孩的声音虽然憔悴，却出奇坚决，眼里闪着热切的光芒。
Catelyn had never asked the singer to ride with them; that choice he had made himself, and how he had come to survive the journey when so many braver men lay dead and unburied behind them, she could never say. Yet here he was, with a scruff of beard that made him look almost a man. Perhaps she owed him something for having come this far. “Very well,” she told him.
凯特琳原本就没有邀这名歌手同行，完全是他自作主张。至于为什么许多比他勇敢的人都弃尸荒野，他却活得好端端的，她就不得而知了。总之他在途中长了点胡碴，看起来多了点男人味道，他都走了这么远，或许她不该拒绝他。“好吧。”她对他说。
“I’ll come as well,” Bronn announced.
“我也去。”波隆表示。
She liked that less well. Without Bronn she would never have reached the Vale, she knew; the sellsword was as fierce a fighter as she had ever seen, and his sword had helped cut them through to safety. Yet for all that, Catelyn misliked the man. Courage he had, and strength, but there was no kindness in him, and little loyalty. And she had seen him riding beside Lannister far too often, talking in low voices and laughing at some private joke. She would have preferred to separate him from the dwarf here and now, but having agreed that Marillion might continue to the Eyrie, she could see no gracious way to deny that same right to Bronn. “As you wish,” she said, although she noted that he had not actually asked her permission.
她更不喜欢他。要不是波隆，她绝不可能抵达艾林谷，这点她很清楚。这名佣兵是个极其剽悍的战士，他的剑为他们杀出一条血路。即便如此，凯特琳还是不喜欢这人。他有勇气，力量也不缺，但他心里没有仁慈二字，更别说忠诚。她时常看见他跟兰尼斯特骑行在一块儿，低语交谈，同声大笑。她原本打算当下就把他和侏儒隔离开，但既然答应让马瑞里安一起去鹰巢城，她实在没有合适的理由拒绝他。“随你的吧。”她说，却也发现他根本就没请求她同意。
Ser Willis Wode remained with Ser Rodrik, a soft-spoken septon fussing over their wounds. Their horses were left behind as well, poor ragged things. Ser Donnel promised to send birds ahead to the Eyrie and the Gates of the Moon with the word of their coming. Fresh mounts were brought forth from the stables, surefooted mountain stock with shaggy coats, and within the hour they set forth once again. Catelyn rode beside her uncle as they began the descent to the valley floor. Behind came Bronn, Tyrion Lannister, Marillion, and six of Brynden’s men.
维里·渥德爵士和罗德利克爵士留了下来，由一位说话轻声细语的修士照料他们的伤势。他们那几匹憔悴不堪的马也被留下。唐纳尔爵士保证会先派鸟儿将他们到来的消息通知鹰巢城和月门堡。有人从马厩里牵来精力充沛、鬃毛蓬松而熟悉山路的马，他们只歇息不到一个小时便又再度上路，朝下方的谷地平原出发，凯特琳走在叔叔旁边，波隆、提利昂·兰尼斯特、马瑞里安以及布林登的六名手下跟随在后。
Not until they were a third of the way down the mountain path, well out of earshot of the others, did Brynden Tully turn to her and say, “So, child. Tell me about this storm of yours.”
直到他们走过三分之一的下山路，远离其他人的听力范围之后，布林登·徒利方才转向她说：“好吧，孩子，告诉我这场风暴是怎么回事。”
“I have not been a child in many years, Uncle,” Catelyn said, but she told him nonetheless. It took longer than she would have believed to tell it all, Lysa’s letter and Bran’s fall, the assassin’s dagger and Littlefinger and her chance meeting with Tyrion Lannister in the crossroads inn.
“叔叔，我早不是小孩子了。”凯特琳道。但她还是一五一十地告诉了他，虽然花的时间远远超出预期。她从莱莎的信、布兰坠楼、刺客的匕首、小指头，一直讲到她在岔路旅店与提利昂·兰尼斯特的巧遇。
Her uncle listened silently, heavy brows shadowing his eyes as his frown grew deeper. Brynden Tully had always known how to listen … to anyone but her father. He was Lord Hoster’s brother, younger by five years, but the two of them had been at war as far back as Catelyn could remember. During one of their louder quarrels, when Catelyn was eight, Lord Hoster had called Brynden “the black goat of the Tully flock.” Laughing, Brynden had pointed out that the sigil of their house was a leaping trout, so he ought to be a black fish rather than a black goat, and from that day forward he had taken it as his personal emblem.
叔叔静静地听着，眉头越皱越深，浓厚的眉毛盖住了眼睛。布林登·徒利是个善于倾听的人……除非对象是她父亲。他是霍斯特公爵的弟弟，虽只相差五岁，但自凯特琳有记忆起，两人便已不和。凯特琳八岁时兄弟俩一场大吵，霍斯特公爵指责布林登是“徒利家的害群黑羊”，但布林登笑着说他们家族的标志是跃出水面的鳟鱼，所以他应该是黑鱼，而非黑羊。从那天起，他便以此为纹章。
The war had not ended until the day she and Lysa had been wed. It was at their wedding feast that Brynden told his brother he was leaving Riverrun to serve Lysa and her new husband, the Lord of the Eyrie. Lord Hoster had not spoken his brother’s name since, from what Edmure told her in his infrequent letters.
一直到她和莱莎出嫁那天，两人的纷争都没结束。布林登正是在婚宴上对他哥哥宣布自己要跟莱莎一起离开奔流城，去为她的新婚丈夫、鹰巢城公爵效命。据艾德慕偶尔写给她的信中所言，从那之后，霍斯特公爵再没提过弟弟的名字。
Nonetheless, during all those years of Catelyn’s girlhood, it had been Brynden the Blackfish to whom Lord Hoster’s children had run with their tears and their tales, when Father was too busy and Mother too ill. Catelyn, Lysa, Edmure … and yes, even Petyr Baelish, their father’s ward … he had listened to them all patiently, as he listened now, laughing at their triumphs and sympathizing with their childish misfortunes.
虽然如此，在凯特琳的少女时代，每每父亲大人太忙，母亲大人又病得太重，霍斯特公爵的子女分享喜怒哀乐的对象，却是布林登叔叔。不论凯特琳，莱莎，还是艾德慕……噢，对了，即便父亲的养子培提尔·贝里席……他都耐心十足地侧耳倾听，为他们获得的成功同声欢笑，对他们幼稚惹来的麻烦表示同情，一如此刻。
When she was done, her uncle remained silent for a long time, as his horse negotiated the steep, rocky trail. “Your father must be told,” he said at last. “If the Lannisters should march, Winterfell is remote and the Vale walled up behind its mountains, but Riverrun lies right in their path.”
她说完之后，叔叔沉默了很长一段时间，他的坐骑沿着陡峭的岩径小心下山。“这事一定要让你父亲知道，”最后他说，“如果兰尼斯特真的出兵，临冬城距离遥远，艾林谷有崇山峻岭，但奔流城恰好在他们必经之路上。”
“I’d had the same fear,” Catelyn admitted. “I shall ask Maester Colemon to send a bird when we reach the Eyrie.” She had other messages to send as well; the commands that Ned had given her for his bannermen, to ready the defenses of the north. “What is the mood in the Vale?” she asked.
“这正是我担忧的，”凯特琳坦承，“等我们到了鹰巢城，我立刻请柯蒙学士派鸟儿捎信去。”她还有别的消息要送，奈德交代她通知诸侯，命令他们准备防御北方。“艾林谷里情势如何？”
“Angry,” Brynden Tully admitted. “Lord Jon was much loved, and the insult was keenly felt when the king named Jaime Lannister to an office the Arryns had held for near three hundred years. Lysa has commanded us to call her son the True Warden of the East, but no one is fooled. Nor is your sister alone in wondering at the manner of the Hand’s death. None dare say Jon was murdered, not openly, but suspicion casts a long shadow.” He gave Catelyn a look, his mouth tight. “And there is the boy.”
“人人都义愤填膺，”布林登·徒利说：“琼恩大人深受爱戴，如今国王把一个近三百年来都由艾林家族继承的职位交给詹姆·兰尼斯特，大家都觉得深受侮辱。莱莎命令我们称呼她儿子为真正的东境守护，但这骗不了人。至于首相大人的死因，也不只有你妹妹怀疑。当然，没人敢公开宣称琼恩是被谋害，可这却是个挥之不去的阴影。”他看了凯特琳一眼，嘴巴一抿。“还有那孩子的问题。”
“The boy? What of him?” She ducked her head as they passed under a low overhang of rock, and around a sharp turn.
“那孩子？他怎么样？”眼前是一块低垂的岩石，她低下头，之后他们转了个大弯。
Her uncle’s voice was troubled. “Lord Robert,” he sighed. “Six years old, sickly, and prone to weep if you take his dolls away. Jon Arryn’s trueborn heir, by all the gods, yet there are some who say he is too weak to sit his father’s seat. Nestor Royce has been high steward these past fourteen years, while Lord Jon served in King’s Landing, and many whisper that he should rule until the boy comes of age. Others believe that Lysa must marry again, and soon. Already the suitors gather like crows on a battlefield. The Eyrie is full of them.”
叔叔的口气忧心忡忡。“劳勃公爵，”他叹道，“才六岁大，一天到晚生病，拿走他的玩偶他就哭。他是琼恩·艾林的亲生儿子，有天上诸神为证，可有人传说他太过虚弱，无法继承父亲的宝座。过去十四年来琼恩大人都在君临任职，此间是由大总管奈斯特·罗伊斯负责，不少人据此认定应该由他来代理，直到那孩子长大为止。还有的人认为莱莎理应再婚，并且越快越好。如今鹰巢城内挤满了追求者，多得像战场上的乌鸦。”
“I might have expected that,” Catelyn said. Small wonder there; Lysa was still young, and the kingdom of Mountain and Vale made a handsome wedding gift. “Will Lysa take another husband?”
“我早该料到，”凯特琳道。这消息不足为奇，莱莎还年轻，山谷王国更是一份最厚重的嫁妆。“莱莎会再嫁吗？”
“She says yes, provided she finds a man who suits her,” Brynden Tully said, “but she has already rejected Lord Nestor and a dozen other suitable men. She swears that this time she will choose her lord husband.”
“她同意，只要找到合适的人。”布林登·徒利道，“但她却拒绝了奈斯特大人和其他十来位追求者。她对外发誓这次要由她来选择夫婿。”
“You of all people can scarce fault her for that.”
“别人也就算了，至少你不该怪她。”
Ser Brynden snorted. “Nor do I, but … it seems to me Lysa is only playing at courtship. She enjoys the sport, but I believe your sister intends to rule herself until her boy is old enough to be Lord of the Eyrie in truth as well as name.”
布林登爵士哼了一声。“我也没怪她，可……在我看来莱莎只是装模作样，她虽然很享受被人追求的爱情游戏，但我相信你妹妹打算亲自主政，直到儿子长大，成为名副其实的鹰巢城公爵。”
“A woman can rule as wisely as a man,” Catelyn said.
“女人跟男人一样可以英明统治。”凯特琳说。
“The right woman can,” her uncle said with a sideways glance. “Make no mistake, Cat. Lysa is not you.” He hesitated a moment. “If truth be told, I fear you may not find your sister as … helpful as you would like.”
“合适的女人才可以。”叔叔从旁扫了她一眼，“凯特，别搞错了，莱莎可不是你。”他迟疑了一会儿。“真要说的话，我很怕你会发现你妹妹能帮得上的忙……没有想像中的多。”
She was puzzled. “What do you mean?”
她被搞糊涂了。“你是什么意思？”
“The Lysa who came back from King’s Landing is not the same girl who went south when her husband was named Hand. Those years were hard for her. You must know. Lord Arryn was a dutiful husband, but their marriage was made from politics, not passion.”
“从君临回来的莱莎，和当初随被任命为首相的丈夫南下时的她，已经不是同一个人。这些年来她吃了不少苦头，你一定得知道。艾林大人虽然是个忠实的好丈夫，但他们的婚姻是建立在政治而非感情之上。”
“As was my own.”
“我的不也是？”
“They began the same, but your ending has been happier than your sister’s. Two babes stillborn, twice as many miscarriages, Lord Arryn’s death … Catelyn, the gods gave Lysa only the one child, and he is all your sister lives for now, poor boy. Small wonder she fled rather than see him handed over to the Lannisters. Your sister is afraid , child, and the Lannisters are what she fears most. She ran to the Vale, stealing away from the Red Keep like a thief in the night, and all to snatch her son out of the lion’s mouth … and now you have brought the lion to her door.”
“你们的婚姻出发点相同，但你的际遇比她好得多。她有两个孩子生下来就没活成，经历了四次流产，加上艾林大人的死……凯特琳，诸神只给了莱莎一个孩子，如今她活着就是为了他。可怜的孩子。难怪她宁可逃走，也不愿见到儿子交给兰尼斯特家抚养。孩子，你妹妹现在非常害怕，而她最怕的就是兰尼斯特。她像个夜贼似的偷偷溜出红堡，跑回艾林谷，一切都是为了把儿子从狮口中抢救出来……结果这会儿你却把狮子带进了她家门。”
“In chains,” Catelyn said. A crevasse yawned on her right, falling away into darkness. She reined up her horse and picked her way along step by careful step.
“我把他擒来的。”凯特琳说。她右手边的山岩出现了一个裂缝，活像一张深不见底的黑暗大口，正张开打着哈欠。她勒紧马缰，小心翼翼地绕过去。
“Oh?” Her uncle glanced back, to where Tyrion Lannister was making his slow descent behind them. “I see an axe on his saddle, a dirk at his belt, and a sellsword that trails after him like a hungry shadow. Where are the chains, sweet one?”
“是吗？”叔叔回头瞄了一眼，看看正在身后缓缓下山的提利昂·兰尼斯特。“我见他鞍挂斧头，腰插匕首，后面还有个如影随形的佣兵。亲爱的，你所谓的‘擒’从何说起啊？”
Catelyn shifted uneasily in her seat. “The dwarf is here, and not by choice. Chains or no, he is my prisoner. Lysa will want him to answer for his crimes no less than I. It was her own lord husband the Lannisters murdered, and her own letter that first warned us against them.”
凯特琳不安地动了动。“反正侏儒人在这里，并且不是自愿。不管什么说法，总之他是我的犯人。莱莎想叫他认罪的急切程度不会在我之下。兰尼斯特家谋害的不是别人，正是她的丈夫啊，当初写信警告我们的也是她。”
Brynden Blackfish gave her a weary smile. “I hope you are right, child,” he sighed, in tones that said she was wrong.
“黑鱼”布林登疲倦地对她笑笑。“孩子，希望你是对的。”他叹口气，言下之意却大不以为然。
The sun was well to the west by the time the slope began to flatten beneath the hooves of their horses. The road widened and grew straight, and for the first time Catelyn noticed wildflowers and grasses growing. Once they reached the valley floor, the going was faster and they made good time, cantering through verdant greenwoods and sleepy little hamlets, past orchards and golden wheat fields, splashing across a dozen sunlit streams. Her uncle sent a standard-bearer ahead of them, a double banner flying from his staff; the moon-and-falcon of House Arryn on high, and below it his own black fish. Farm wagons and merchants’ carts and riders from lesser houses moved aside to let them pass.
马蹄下的斜坡开始放缓，太阳已在西边。道路逐渐宽阔，变得笔直，凯特琳也首次注意到路边有野花和青草。等他们抵达谷地平原，行进的速度更快，他们没有浪费时间，加紧赶路，穿越青翠绿林与沉静的小村庄，经过果园和金黄色的麦田，溅起水花渡过阳光照耀的溪流。叔叔派出掌旗手跑在前面，长竿上飘扬着两面旗帜，上方的是艾林家族的新月猎鹰，下面则是他自己的黑鱼。农家马车，生意人的货车和小贵族家的骑手纷纷回避，让他们通过。
Even so, it was full dark before they reached the stout castle that stood at the foot of the Giant’s Lance. Torches flickered atop its ramparts, and the horned moon danced upon the dark waters of its moat. The drawbridge was up and the portcullis down, but Catelyn saw lights burning in the gatehouse and spilling from the windows of the square towers beyond.
即便如此，当他们抵达巨人之枪山脚下那座坚固城堡时，天色已经全黑。城垛上火把通明，新月在护城河的漆黑水面舞动。吊桥已经升起，铁闸也已降下，但凯特琳看到城门楼内的火光，灯光也从城楼后面的窗户间流泻出来。
“The Gates of the Moon,” her uncle said as the party drew rein. His standard-bearer rode to the edge of the moat to hail the men in the gatehouse. “Lord Nestor’s seat. He should be expecting us. Look up.”
“这就是月门堡。”队伍靠近城堡时，叔叔说。他的掌旗手骑到护城河边招呼塔楼里的人。“奈斯特大人的居城。他应该在等我们了。你再看看上面。”
Catelyn raised her eyes, up and up and up. At first all she saw was stone and trees, the looming mass of the great mountain shrouded in night, as black as a starless sky. Then she noticed the glow of distant fires well above them; a tower keep, built upon the steep side of the mountain, its lights like orange eyes staring down from above. Above that was another, higher and more distant, and still higher a third, no more than a flickering spark in the sky. And finally, up where the falcons soared, a flash of white in the moonlight. Vertigo washed over her as she stared upward at the pale towers, so far above.
凯特琳抬起头，不断抬高、抬高、抬高。起初，她只看到山石和树木，夜幕覆盖的崇山峻岭，漆黑一如无星之夜。接着，她注意到高处飘渺的花火，那原是一座城堡的塔楼，嵌筑于陡峭的危崖绝壁上，其灯火犹如橙色的眼睛般俯视大地。在那之上，还有一座更高更远的塔，再上去还有一座，几乎只是夜空中一点闪耀的火星。最后，在飞鹰翱翔的极高处，有一片在月光下闪烁的白光。她仰视着高空朦胧的苍白高塔，晕眩感顿时排山倒海般袭来。
“The Eyrie,” she heard Marillion murmur, awed.
“鹰巢城。”她听见马瑞里安喃喃说，显然大为震惊。
The sharp voice of Tyrion Lannister broke in. “The Arryns must not be overfond of company. If you’re planning to make us climb that mountain in the dark, I’d rather you kill me here.”
提利昂·兰尼斯特尖锐的声音插进来：“看来艾林家的人挺孤僻，不喜欢有人作伴。假如你打算要我们摸黑爬上去，那干脆在这里把我杀了好了。”
“We’ll spend the night here and make the ascent on the morrow,” Brynden told him.
“我们今晚在此过夜，明天上山。”布林登告诉他。
“I can scarcely wait,” the dwarf replied. “How do we get up there? I’ve no experience at riding goats.”
“哟，我可迫不及待，”侏儒回话，“要怎么上去？骑山羊我可不在行。”
“Mules,” Brynden said, smiling.
“我们骑的是骡子。”布林登微笑道。
“There are steps carved into the mountain,” Catelyn said. Ned had told her about them when he talked of his youth here with Robert Baratheon and Jon Arryn.
“山上凿了石阶。”凯特琳说。奈德提起他与劳勃·拜拉席恩和琼恩·艾林在此度过的童年岁月时，曾经跟她讲过。
Her uncle nodded. “It is too dark to see them, but the steps are there. Too steep and narrow for horses, but mules can manage them most of the way. The path is guarded by three waycastles, Stone and Snow and Sky. The mules will take us as far up as Sky.”
叔叔点头。“现在天太暗，看不见，但的确是有石阶可走。石阶对马来说太陡太狭窄，骡子倒还勉强能成。沿路有三座堡垒：危岩堡、雪山堡和长天堡，骡子最高可以走到长天堡。”
Tyrion Lannister glanced up doubtfully. “And beyond that?”
提利昂·兰尼斯特一脸狐疑地往上瞄。“那接下来怎么办？”
Brynden smiled. “Beyond that, the path is too steep even for mules. We ascend on foot the rest of the way. Or perchance you’d prefer to ride a basket. The Eyrie clings to the mountain directly above Sky, and in its cellars are six great winches with long iron chains to draw supplies up from below. If you prefer, my lord of Lannister, I can arrange for you to ride up with the bread and beer and apples.”
布林登微笑道：“在那之后，山路太险，连骡子也上不去。所以接下来我们步行上山，或者你想搭篮子？鹰巢城在长天堡正上方的山顶，它的地窖里有六个挂铁链的大绞盘，负责拉补给。如果你愿意，兰尼斯特大人，我可以安排你跟面包、啤酒和苹果一起上去。”
The dwarf gave a bark of laughter. “Would that I were a pumpkin,” he said. “Alas, my lord father would no doubt be most chagrined if his son of Lannister went to his fate like a load of turnips. If you ascend on foot, I fear I must do the same. We Lannisters do have a certain pride.”
侏儒干笑一声。“可惜我不是南瓜。”他说，“哎，如果我老爸知道他儿子跟萝卜一样被拖上断头台，一定很不高兴。假如你们要徒步上山，恐怕我也得照做。我们兰尼斯特家的人多少还有点自尊。”
“Pride?” Catelyn snapped. His mocking tone and easy manner made her angry. “Arrogance, some might call it. Arrogance and avarice and lust for power.”
“自尊？”凯特琳斥道。他那充满嘲弄的口吻和过于轻慢的态度让她非常恼火。“我看是自傲吧。骄傲自大，贪得无厌，迷恋权位。”
“My brother is undoubtedly arrogant,” Tyrion Lannister replied. “My father is the soul of avarice, and my sweet sister Cersei lusts for power with every waking breath. I, however, am innocent as a little lamb. Shall I bleat for you?” He grinned.
“我老哥的确傲慢得很，”提利昂·兰尼斯特答道，“我老爸则根本是贪婪的化身，至于我那好姐姐嘛，迷恋权位就跟呼吸一般重要。惟有我，却是只天真无邪的小羊。怎么样，要不要我咩咩叫两声给你听啊？”他咧嘴嘻笑。
The drawbridge came creaking down before she could reply, and they heard the sound of oiled chains as the portcullis was drawn up. Men-at-arms carried burning brands out to light their way, and her uncle led them across the moat. Lord Nestor Royce, High Steward of the Vale and Keeper of the Gates of the Moon, was waiting in the yard to greet them, surrounded by his knights. “Lady Stark,” he said, bowing. He was a massive, barrel-chested man, and his bow was clumsy.
她还不及回答，吊桥便喀啦喀啦降了下来，接着他们听到上过油的铁链滑动，铁闸也随之升起。士兵们手持火炬出来为他们照明，叔叔领头穿过护城河。奈斯特·罗伊斯男爵，艾林谷的大总管和月门堡的守护者，正在中庭里迎接他们，身边围满了骑士。“史塔克夫人，”他鞠躬道。他是个身躯庞大、胸膛厚实的人，动作起来颇显笨拙。
Catelyn dismounted to stand before him. “Lord Nestor,” she said. She knew the man only by reputation; Bronze Yohn’s cousin, from a lesser branch of House Royce, yet still a formidable lord in his own right. “We have had a long and tiring journey. I would beg the hospitality of your roof tonight, if I might.”
凯特琳下了马，站在他面前。“奈斯特大人，”她说。她久闻其大名，他是青铜约恩的堂弟，生于罗伊斯家族的旁系支脉，但本身依旧是个响当当的人物。“我们长途跋涉，疲累不堪，如果您方便的话，今晚想在此借宿一宿。”
“My roof is yours, my lady,” Lord Nestor returned gruffly, “but your sister the Lady Lysa has sent down word from the Eyrie. She wishes to see you at once. The rest of your party will be housed here and sent up at first light.”
“夫人，请别客气。”奈斯特男爵粗声道，“但您的妹妹莱莎夫人刚从鹰巢城传话下来，希望能立刻见您一面。跟您同来的人今晚就住这里，明天一大早送他们上山。”
Her uncle swung off his horse. “What madness is this?” he said bluntly. Brynden Tully had never been a man to blunt the edge of his words. “A night ascent, with the moon not even full? Even Lysa should know that’s an invitation to a broken neck.”
叔叔翻身下马。“这太疯狂了！”他唐突地说。布林登·徒利向来不是个善于修饰话语棱角的人。“今天并不是满月，你还要他们连夜上山？就算莱莎也知道这是找死。”
“The mules know the way, Ser Brynden.” A wiry girl of seventeen or eighteen years stepped up beside Lord Nestor. Her dark hair was cropped short and straight around her head, and she wore riding leathers and a light shirt of silvered ringmail. She bowed to Catelyn, more gracefully than her lord. “I promise you, my lady, no harm will come to you. It would be my honor to take you up. I’ve made the dark climb a hundred times. Mychel says my father must have been a goat.”
“布林登爵士，骡子认得路哪。”一个瘦长结实的十七八岁少女自奈斯特男爵身边走上前来。她一头剪短的黑发，身穿骑马皮衣和一件镀银轻环甲。她朝凯特琳鞠躬的姿势，比她主人还要优雅。“夫人，我向您保证，不会出事的。能带您上山是我的荣幸。这条路我摸黑走过几百次，米歇尔说我父亲准是头山羊。”
She sounded so cocky that Catelyn had to smile. “Do you have a name, child?”
她那充满自信的口气，听得凯特琳忍不住微笑。“孩子，你可有名字？”
“Mya Stone, if it please you, my lady,” the girl said.
“夫人高兴的话，叫我米亚·石东就行。”女孩道。
It did not please her; it was an effort for Catelyn to keep the smile on her face. Stone was a bastard’s name in the Vale, as Snow was in the north, and Flowers in Highgarden; in each of the Seven Kingdoms, custom had fashioned a surname for children born with no names of their own. Catelyn had nothing against this girl, but suddenly she could not help but think of Ned’s bastard on the Wall, and the thought made her angry and guilty, both at once. She struggled to find words for a reply.
她听了却不高兴。凯特琳好不容易才维持住脸上笑容。石东是艾林谷私生孩子的姓，正如北方的雪诺，高庭的佛花。依照习俗，七大王国各有专门给没爹的孩子用的姓。凯特琳对这女孩本身并无恶感，只是不免突然想到奈德那正驻守长城的私生子，这个念头让她羞愤交加。她挣扎着找话回应。
Lord Nestor filled the silence. “Mya’s a clever girl, and if she vows she will bring you safely to the Lady Lysa, I believe her. She has not failed me yet.”
奈斯特男爵填补了沉默。“米亚是个机灵的孩子，她起誓会把您安全地带到莱莎夫人那边，我相信她。她从没教我失望过。”
“Then I put myself in your hands, Mya Stone,” Catelyn said. “Lord Nestor, I charge you to keep a close guard on my prisoner.”
“既然如此，米亚·石东，我就把自己交到你手中了。”凯特琳道，“奈斯特大人，还请您严加看管我的犯人。”
“And I charge you to bring the prisoner a cup of wine and a nicely crisped capon, before he dies of hunger,” Lannister said. “A girl would be pleasant as well, but I suppose that’s too much to ask of you.” The sellsword Bronn laughed aloud.
“也请您给这位犯人弄杯酒，来只香酥烤鸡，免得他饿死。”兰尼斯特道，“饭后有个女孩乐乐更好，怕只怕我要求得太多了。”佣兵波隆听了哈哈大笑。
Lord Nestor ignored the banter. “As you say, my lady, so it will be done.” Only then did he look at the dwarf. “See our lord of Lannister to a tower cell, and bring him meat and mead.”
奈斯特男爵没理会他的嘲弄。“夫人，就照您吩咐，一切悉听尊愿。”然后他才看看侏儒。“把兰尼斯特大人送进塔上的监狱，帮他张罗酒肉。”
Catelyn took her leave of her uncle and the others as Tyrion Lannister was led off, then followed the bastard girl through the castle. Two mules were waiting in the upper bailey, saddled and ready. Mya helped her mount one while a guardsman in a sky-blue cloak opened the narrow postern gate. Beyond was dense forest of pine and spruce, and the mountain like a black wall, but the steps were there, chiseled deep into the rock, ascending into the sky. “Some people find it easier if they close their eyes,” Mya said as she led the mules through the gate into the dark wood. “When they get frightened or dizzy, sometimes they hold on to the mule too tight. They don’t like that.”
提利昂·兰尼斯特被领走之后，凯特琳向叔叔和余人告别，跟着那私生女穿过城堡。两头骡子等在城堡的上层庭院里，整装待发。米亚扶她骑上，一位身着天蓝色披风的守卫拉开狭窄的后门。门外是浓密的云杉和松木，山壁像堵黑墙，但岩石上果真有深深凿出的石阶，向上直入天际。“有些人觉得闭上眼睛会比较安心，”米亚领着骡子穿过后门，走进森林。“他们觉得害怕或头晕的时候，常把骡子抓得太紧，可骡子不喜欢这样。”
“I was born a Tully and wed to a Stark,” Catelyn said. “I do not frighten easily. Do you plan to light a torch?” The steps were black as pitch.
“我本姓徒利，又嫁进史塔克家，”凯特琳道，“要吓到我可不容易。你打算点火把吗？”石阶像沥青一般黑。
The girl made a face. “Torches just blind you. On a clear night like this, the moon and the stars are enough. Mychel says I have the eyes of the owl.” She mounted and urged her mule up the first step. Catelyn’s animal followed of its own accord.
女孩扮了个鬼脸。“点火你反而看不见啦。今晚天气这么好，有月亮和星光足矣。米歇尔说我有对猫头鹰的眼睛。”她也骑了上去，催促骡子踏上第一阶。凯特琳的坐骑自行跟了上去。
“You mentioned Mychel before,” Catelyn said. The mules set the pace, slow but steady. She was perfectly content with that.
“你刚才也提到米歇尔。”凯特琳道。骡子的步伐虽慢，却很平稳，她已经非常满意。
“Mychel’s my love,” Mya explained. “Mychel Redfort. He’s squire to Ser Lyn Corbray. We’re to wed as soon as he becomes a knight, next year or the year after.”
“米歇尔是我的爱人。”米亚解释，“米歇尔·雷德佛，他是林恩·科布瑞爵士的侍从。过几年等他当上骑士，我们就要结婚了。”
She sounded so like Sansa, so happy and innocent with her dreams. Catelyn smiled, but the smile was tinged with sadness. The Redforts were an old name in the Vale, she knew, with the blood of the First Men in their veins. His love she might be, but no Redfort would ever wed a bastard. His family would arrange a more suitable match for him, to a Corbray or a Waynwood or a Royce, or perhaps a daughter of some greater house outside the Vale. If Mychel Redfort laid with this girl at all, it would be on the wrong side of the sheet.
她的语气好像珊莎，都是那么愉悦美妙，无忧无虑，充满梦想，凯特琳听了不禁微笑，笑里却带着忧伤。她知道雷德佛家是峡谷地区历史悠久的世家大族，体内更有先民的血脉。她或许能成为他的爱人，然而雷德佛家的人绝不会娶私生女。他家里会帮他安排一桩门当户对的婚事，或许是科布瑞家族，也可能是韦伍德或罗伊斯家族，甚至是艾林谷外的豪门望族。就算米歇尔·雷德佛跟这女孩睡过，也不能代表什么。
The ascent was easier than Catelyn had dared hope. The trees pressed close, leaning over the path to make a rustling green roof that shut out even the moon, so it seemed as though they were moving up a long black tunnel. But the mules were surefooted and tireless, and Mya Stone did indeed seem blessed with night-eyes. They plodded upward, winding their way back and forth across the face of the mountain as the steps twisted and turned. A thick layer of fallen needles carpeted the path, so the shoes of their mules made only the softest sound on the rock. The quiet soothed her, and the gentle rocking motion set Catelyn to swaying in her saddle. Before long she was fighting sleep.
上山的过程比凯特琳原本期待的要轻松许多。森林离他们很近，伸展过来遮住山路，搭起一棚瑟瑟作响的青绿屋顶，连月光也被遮蔽，所以她们仿佛是在暗道里行进。但是骡子的步履稳健，毫无疲态，米亚·石东也的确如有夜视能力。山路蜿蜒崎岖，两人沿路缓步慢行，越过山壁。厚厚的松针铺在地上宛如绒毯，骡子走在石阶上只发出最细微的声音。这片宁静安抚了她的情绪，轻微的晃动让凯特琳在鞍上摇摇摆摆，没多久她就开始抗拒瞌睡的诱惑了。
Perhaps she did doze for a moment, for suddenly a massive ironbound gate was looming before them. “Stone,” Mya announced cheerily, dismounting. Iron spikes were set along the tops of formidable stone walls, and two fat round towers overtopped the keep. The gate swung open at Mya’s shout. Inside, the portly knight who commanded the waycastle greeted Mya by name and offered them skewers of charred meat and onions still hot from the spit. Catelyn had not realized how hungry she was. She ate standing in the yard, as stablehands moved their saddles to fresh mules. The hot juices ran down her chin and dripped onto her cloak, but she was too famished to care.
或许她真打了一阵盹吧，因为宏伟的镶铁城门突然便矗立在她们面前。“危岩堡到了。”米亚开心地跳下骡子宣布。坚实的石城墙顶插满铁钉，两个圆胖的塔楼环绕主堡。城门在米亚的呼喊下缓缓打开，负责指挥这座堡垒的骑士是个粗壮的家伙，他亲切地叫出米亚的名字，拿出刚从烤架上取下、虽有点焦但热腾腾的烧肉和烤洋葱招待她们。凯特琳早已忘记自己有多饿，站在中庭里就吃了起来，马夫则把她们的鞍鞫换到精力充沛的新骡子背上。温热的肉汁流过她的下巴，滴在披风上，但她实在太饿，便也管不了这许多。
Then it was up onto a new mule and out again into the starlight. The second part of the ascent seemed more treacherous to Catelyn. The trail was steeper, the steps more worn, and here and there littered with pebbles and broken stone. Mya had to dismount a half-dozen times to move fallen rocks from their path. “You don’t want your mule to break a leg up here,” she said. Catelyn was forced to agree. She could feel the altitude more now. The trees were sparser up here, and the wind blew more vigorously, sharp gusts that tugged at her clothing and pushed her hair into her eyes. From time to time the steps doubled back on themselves, and she could see Stone below them, and the Gates of the Moon farther down, its torches no brighter than candles.
随后她们骑上新骡子，在星光照耀下再度出发。凯特琳觉得这次的山路更为艰险，不仅路径更陡，石阶磨损得厉害，地上也散满了小圆石和岩石碎片。有好几次米亚都得下骡，清开路上的落石。“若是骡子在这里摔断腿，那可就危险了。”她说。凯特琳只有同意的份。此时她已经能切身感受所处的高度，这里林木渐稀，风势转强，拉扯着她的衣服，把头发吹进眼睛里。山路不断迂回盘旋，因此她可以看见下面的危岩堡，以及更下方的月门堡，那里的火光好似烛焰一般。
Snow was smaller than Stone, a single fortified tower and a timber keep and stable hidden behind a low wall of unmortared rock. Yet it nestled against the Giant’s Lance in such a way as to command the entire stone stair above the lower waycastle. An enemy intent on the Eyrie would have to fight his way from Stone step by step, while rocks and arrows rained down from Snow above. The commander, an anxious young knight with a pockmarked face, offered bread and cheese and the chance to warm themselves before his fire, but Mya declined. “We ought to keep going, my lady,” she said. “If it please you.” Catelyn nodded.
雪山堡比危岩堡小得多，只有一座加固的塔楼，一座木料搭建的主堡，以及躲在低矮石墙后的马厩。围墙砌得很粗糙，没有涂上灰泥。虽然如此，它却紧靠着巨人之枪，形势足以掌控危岩堡以上所有的石阶。若有敌人想动鹰巢城的主意，他就得从危岩堡一阶一阶地打上来，同时还必须承受自雪山堡如雨般落下的飞箭和落石。这里的指挥官是个一脸麻子、焦躁不安的年轻骑士。他拿面包和乳酪招待她们，并请两人到他的火炉边取暖，但米亚婉拒了。“夫人，我们应该继续走，”她说：“如果您愿意的话。”凯特琳点点头。
Again they were given fresh mules. Hers was white. Mya smiled when she saw him. “Whitey’s a good one, my lady. Sure of foot, even on ice, but you need to be careful. He’ll kick if he doesn’t like you.”
她们再次换了新骡子。给她的那头是白的，米亚一见便微笑道：“夫人，小白是头好骡。就算步履坚冰，它的脚步也很稳，但您千万小心，他要是不喜欢您，可是会踢人的。”
The white mule seemed to like Catelyn; there was no kicking, thank the gods. There was no ice either, and she was grateful for that as well. “My mother says that hundreds of years ago, this was where the snow began,” Mya told her. “It was always white above here, and the ice never melted.” She shrugged. “I can’t remember ever seeing snow this far down the mountain, but maybe it was that way once, in the olden times.”
诸神保佑，小白似乎还挺喜欢凯特琳，至少它没有踢人。路上没有冰，这点她也很感激。“我妈说，数百年前，这里就是风雪线。”米亚告诉她，“从这往上便是白茫茫的，冰雪从不融化。”她耸耸肩，“离山顶还很远，我不记得在这儿看过雪，不过，或许古时候是那样罢。”
So young , Catelyn thought, trying to remember if she had ever been like that. The girl had lived half her life in summer, and that was all she knew. Winter is coming, child , she wanted to tell her. The words were on her lips; she almost said them. Perhaps she was becoming a Stark at last.
她好年轻，凯特琳心想，一边试着回忆自己是否曾如她这般纯真。这女孩大半时光都活在夏季，除此之外她一无所知。孩子，凛冬将至啊，她想告诉她。话到嘴边，几乎就要出口，或许她究竟是逐渐变成史塔克家的人了吧。
Above Snow, the wind was a living thing, howling around them like a wolf in the waste, then falling off to nothing as if to lure them into complacency. The stars seemed brighter up here, so close that she could almost touch them, and the horned moon was huge in the clear black sky. As they climbed, Catelyn found it was better to look up than down. The steps were cracked and broken from centuries of freeze and thaw and the tread of countless mules, and even in the dark the heights put her heart in her throat. When they came to a high saddle between two spires of rock, Mya dismounted. “It’s best to lead the mules over,” she said. “The wind can be a little scary here, my lady.”
雪山堡之上，强风是个活生生的事物，犹如荒野孤狼般在她们周围呼啸狂吼，时时又归于平静，仿佛有意诱使她们掉以轻心。从这里看去，星星似乎更亮，好似近在咫尺，触手可及。一弯新月挂在清朗的夜空中，显得硕大无朋。凯特琳只觉上山时往上看比往下看感觉好多了。经过几百年来的结冰、融雪和无以计数的骡蹄踩踏，石阶破损得相当厉害，即便是在黑暗中看不清，她依旧提心吊胆。当她们来到两座尖石间的平台时，米亚爬下骡子。“这里我们最好牵骡子过去，”她说，“夫人，请注意，这儿的风有点强。”
Catelyn climbed stiffly from the shadows and looked at the path ahead; twenty feet long and close to three feet wide, but with a precipitous drop to either side. She could hear the wind shrieking. Mya stepped lightly out, her mule following as calmly as if they were crossing a bailey. It was her turn. Yet no sooner had she taken her first step than fear caught Catelyn in its jaws. She could feel the emptiness, the vast black gulfs of air that yawned around her. She stopped, trembling, afraid to move. The wind screamed at her and wrenched at her cloak, trying to pull her over the edge. Catelyn edged her foot backward, the most timid of steps, but the mule was behind her, and she could not retreat. I am going to die here , she thought. She could feel cold sweat trickling down her back.
凯特琳手脚僵硬地从阴影里爬出，看看眼前的山路：大约二十尺长，三尺宽，但路的两边都是万丈深渊。她能听见冷风的呼啸。米亚轻轻探出脚步，骡子平稳地跟随在后，尤似穿越城堡中庭。接下来就轮到她了。凯特琳才刚踏出第一步，恐惧就紧紧地抓住了她。她感觉到两侧的虚无空洞，感觉到在她周遭大口呵欠的黑色气旋。她停下脚步，颤抖着不敢前进。狂风向她嘶吼，拉扯她的披风，企图将她拖下山崖。凯特琳畏缩地退了一小步，但骡子挡在后面，她没有去路。我要死在这里了，她心想。她觉得背心冷汗淋漓。
“Lady Stark,” Mya called across the gulf. The girl sounded a thousand leagues away. “Are you well?”
“史塔克夫人，”米亚从对面喊。女孩的声音听起来仿佛有几千里远。“您还好吗？”
Catelyn Tully Stark swallowed what remained of her pride. “I … I cannot do this, child,” she called out.
凯特琳·徒利·史塔克咽下了仅存的自尊。“孩子，我……我做不到。”
“Yes you can,” the bastard girl said. “I know you can. Look how wide the path is.”
“没问题的，”私生女孩说，“我知道您行。您看看路有多宽。”
“I don’t want to look.” The world seemed to be spinning around her, mountain and sky and mules, whirling like a child’s top. Catelyn closed her eyes to steady her ragged breathing.
“我不想看。”世界仿佛在她身边旋转，山脉、天空和骡子通通搅成一团。凯特琳闭上眼睛，稳住自己急促的呼吸。
“I’ll come back for you,” Mya said. “Don’t move, my lady.”
“我这就过来，”米亚道，“夫人，您站在那儿别动。”
Moving was about the last thing Catelyn was about to do. She listened to the skirling of the wind and the scuffling sound of leather on stone. Then Mya was there, taking her gently by the arm. “Keep your eyes closed if you like. Let go of the rope now, Whitey will take care of himself. Very good, my lady. I’ll lead you over, it’s easy, you’ll see. Give me a step now. That’s it, move your foot, just slide it forward. See. Now another. Easy. You could run across. Another one, go on. Yes.” And so, foot by foot, step by step, the bastard girl led Catelyn across, blind and trembling, while the white mule followed placidly behind them.
此刻凯特琳最不会做的就是乱动。她听着风声呼啸，以及皮革在石头上发出的摩擦，随后米亚就来了，轻轻地牵起她的手。“您怕的话，闭上眼睛就好。绳子可以放开，小白自己会走。很好，夫人。我带您过去，您看吧，没什么大不了。走一步试试看，就是这样，动动您的脚，往前滑就对了，看，挺简单吧？再来一步，慢慢来，路这么宽，您都可以跑哩。再来一步，再来。对了。”私生女孩就这样一步一步带着闭起眼睛，颤抖不已的凯特琳走过危崖，那头白骡子则慢悠悠地跟在后面。
The waycastle called Sky was no more than a high, crescent-shaped wall of unmortared stone raised against the side of the mountain, but even the topless towers of Valyria could not have looked more beautiful to Catelyn Stark. Here at last the snow crown began; Sky’s weathered stones were rimed with frost, and long spears of ice hung from the slopes above.
长天堡不过是一道新月形状，沿着山壁用粗石堆砌而成的高耸城墙，但凯特琳·史塔克却觉得，即便傲立云霄的瓦雷利亚通天塔也没这般美丽。雪线由此开始，长天堡历尽沧桑的城墙处处结霜，其上的斜坡挂满了长长的冰柱。
Dawn was breaking in the east as Mya Stone hallooed for the guards, and the gates opened before them. Inside the walls there was only a series of ramps and a great tumble of boulders and stones of all sizes. No doubt it would be the easiest thing in the world to begin an avalanche from here. A mouth yawned in the rock face in front of them. “The stables and barracks are in there,” Mya said. “The last part is inside the mountain. It can be a little dark, but at least you’re out of the wind. This is as far as the mules can go. Past here, well, it’s a sort of chimney, more like a stone ladder than proper steps, but it’s not too bad. Another hour and we’ll be there.”
米亚·石东向守卫打过招呼，城门便在她们面前打开，此时东方已经渐露曙光。城墙背后是一连串的坡道，各种大小的岩石摇摇欲坠，这里无疑便是全世界最容易山崩的地方了。她们面前的岩壁上开了一个通道。“马厩和军营都在里面。”米亚说，“最后一段路是在山内，有点黑，但也免了风雪。骡子只能到此为止，从这儿开始，嗯，直直地爬上去，那路比较像石头做的云梯，而非正式的台阶，但还不算太难走。大概再有一个小时就到了。”
Catelyn looked up. Directly overhead, pale in the dawn light, she could see the foundations of the Eyrie. It could not be more than six hundred feet above them. From below it looked like a small white honeycomb. She remembered what her uncle had said of baskets and winches. “The Lannisters may have their pride,” she told Mya, “but the Tullys are born with better sense. I have ridden all day and the best part of a night. Tell them to lower a basket. I shall ride with the turnips.”
凯特琳抬头仰望，在头顶正上方，破晓的晨光之中，她可以看见鹰巢城的基石，离她们大概不超过六百尺。从下看去，如同小小的白色蜂窝。她忆起叔叔提起的篮子和绞盘。“兰尼斯特家的人或许自负傲慢，”她告诉米亚：“但徒利家的人懂得变通之道。我已经骑了一整天马，又走了大半夜。请他们放下篮子，我跟萝卜一起上山。”
The sun was well above the mountains by the time Catelyn Stark finally reached the Eyrie. A stocky, silver-haired man in a sky-blue cloak and hammered moon-and-falcon breastplate helped her from the basket; Ser Vardis Egen, captain of Jon Arryn’s household guard. Beside him stood Maester Colemon, thin and nervous, with too little hair and too much neck. “Lady Stark,” Ser Vardis said, “the pleasure is as great as it is unanticipated.” Maester Colemon bobbed his head in agreement. “Indeed it is, my lady, indeed it is. I have sent word to your sister. She left orders to be awakened the instant you arrived.”
凯特琳·史塔克终于抵达鹰巢城时，太阳已经高高升起。一位满头银发、身材健壮、穿着天蓝色披风、新月猎鹰胸甲的人扶她出了吊篮。他是琼恩·艾林的侍卫队长瓦狄斯·伊根爵士，站在他身边的则是体格瘦弱、神色不安、头发太少、脖子却太长的柯蒙学士。“史塔克夫人，”瓦狄斯爵士道，“您真是教我们又惊又喜。”柯蒙学士颔首同意。“可不是嘛，夫人，可不是嘛。我已经带话给您妹妹，她吩咐您一到就叫醒她。”
“I hope she had a good night’s rest,” Catelyn said with a certain bite in her tone that seemed to go unnoticed.
“我希望她昨晚睡得香甜。”凯特琳的话中带了一丝嘲讽，但似乎没人注意。
The men escorted her from the winch room up a spiral stair. The Eyrie was a small castle by the standards of the great houses; seven slender white towers bunched as tightly as arrows in a quiver on a shoulder of the great mountain. It had no need of stables nor smithys nor kennels, but Ned said its granary was as large as Winterfell’s, and its towers could house five hundred men. Yet it seemed strangely deserted to Catelyn as she passed through it, its pale stone halls echoing and empty.
他们护送她从绞盘室走上螺旋梯。以王国中贵族的标准而言，鹰巢城规模不大，只是七座白色尖塔像筒里的箭一样挤成一团，坐落在山巅上。它虽无马厩、铁铺或犬舍，但奈德曾说这里的粮仓和临冬城的一般大，而塔楼足以容纳五百人。然而当凯特琳行经其中，却发现城堡异常荒凉，白石打造的厅堂里回声四起，空无一人。
Lysa was waiting alone in her solar, still clad in her bed robes. Her long auburn hair tumbled unbound across bare white shoulders and down her back. A maid stood behind her, brushing out the night’s tangles, but when Catelyn entered, her sister rose to her feet, smiling. “Cat,” she said. “Oh, Cat, how good it is to see you. My sweet sister.” She ran across the chamber and wrapped her sister in her arms. “How long it has been,” Lysa murmured against her. “Oh, how very very long.”
莱莎独自在书房里等她，身上披着睡袍。她一头红褐色长发未经整理，垂过裸露的肩膀，覆在背后。一个侍女站在她身后，正帮她梳理因睡眠而打结的发丝。凯特琳刚进门，妹妹立刻笑盈盈地起身。“凯特，”她说，“噢，凯特，见到你真好。我亲爱的好姐姐。”她跑过房间，紧紧地搂住姐姐。“我们好久没见面了，”莱莎抱着她喃喃说，“噢，真的好久好久。”
It had been five years, in truth; five cruel years, for Lysa. They had taken their toll. Her sister was two years the younger, yet she looked older now. Shorter than Catelyn, Lysa had grown thick of body, pale and puffy of face. She had the blue eyes of the Tullys, but hers were pale and watery, never still. Her small mouth had turned petulant. As Catelyn held her, she remembered the slender, high-breasted girl who’d waited beside her that day in the sept at Riverrun. How lovely and full of hope she had been. All that remained of her sister’s beauty was the great fall of thick auburn hair that cascaded to her waist.
事实上，两人有五年没见。对莱莎而言，那是残酷的五年，岁月在她身上留下了痕迹。妹妹小她两岁，但现在看起来年纪却比她大。莱莎原本就比凯特琳矮，如今她胖了，脸也显得苍白臃肿。她有着徒利家族的蓝眼睛，却是那么黯淡而湿润，目光游移不定，小嘴唇也没了生气。凯特琳抱着她，想起当年在奔流城的圣堂婚礼时站在自己身边，那个身躯纤细、抬头挺胸的女孩。如今妹妹的美貌只剩下那头蓬松柔软、流泻至腰的红棕色长发。
“You look well,” Catelyn lied, “but … tired.”
“你看起来气色很好，”凯特琳撒了谎。“只是……有点累。”
Her sister broke the embrace. “Tired. Yes. Oh, yes.” She seemed to notice the others then; her maid, Maester Colemon, Ser Vardis. “Leave us,” she told them. “I wish to speak to my sister alone.” She held Catelyn’s hand as they withdrew …
妹妹松开她。“是有点累，是啊，真的有点累。”这时她似乎注意到在场的其他人：侍女、柯蒙学士和瓦狄斯爵士。“你们下去罢，”她告诉他们，“我想跟我姐姐单独谈谈。”她挽起凯特琳，看着他们离开……
… and dropped it the instant the door closed. Catelyn saw her face change. It was as if the sun had gone behind a cloud. “Have you taken leave of your senses?” Lysa snapped at her. “To bring him here , without a word of permission, without so much as a warning, to drag us into your quarrels with the Lannisters …”
……门一关上，便立刻摔开她的手。凯特琳见她脸色一变，仿佛乌云遮蔽了太阳。“你到底想干什么？”莱莎斥责她，“竟然未经许可，连声招呼都不打，就把他带来这里，把我们扯进你跟兰尼斯特的争端……”
“My quarrels?” Catelyn could scarce believe what she was hearing. A great fire burned in the hearth, but there was no trace of warmth in Lysa’s voice. “They were your quarrels first, sister. It was you who sent me that cursed letter, you who wrote that the Lannisters had murdered your husband.”
“我的争端？”凯特琳简直不敢相信自己的耳朵。壁炉里火光熊熊，但莱莎的声音却没有丝毫温暖。“小妹，打一开始这就是你的事。你写了那封该死的信给我，说兰尼斯特家的人害死了你丈夫。”
“To warn you, so you could stay away from them! I never meant to fight them! Gods, Cat, do you know what you’ve done?”
“我写信的目的是警告你，叫你离他们远一点！不是叫你跟他们硬碰硬！诸神在上，凯特，你知道这样做会有什么后果？”
“Mother?” a small voice said. Lysa whirled, her heavy robe swirling around her. Robert Arryn, Lord of the Eyrie, stood in the doorway, clutching a ragged cloth doll and looking at them with large eyes. He was a painfully thin child, small for his age and sickly all his days, and from time to time he trembled. The shaking sickness, the maesters called it. “I heard voices.”
“妈？”一个细小的声音说。莱莎旋身，厚重的长袍也跟着转圈。鹰巢城公爵劳勃·艾林站在门边，抱着一个破烂的布偶，睁大双眼看着她们。这孩子瘦得可怜，个子比同年龄的孩子都要小，一张病恹恹的脸，还不时颤抖。她知道，学士管这种病叫癫痫。“我听见说话的声音了。”
Small wonder, Catelyn thought; Lysa had almost been shouting. Still, her sister looked daggers at her. “This is your aunt Catelyn, baby. My sister, Lady Stark. Do you remember?”
这也难怪，凯特琳心想，因为莱莎刚才几乎就是在吼。妹妹看她的眼神依旧锐利如刀。“小宝贝，这是你凯特琳阿姨。她是我姐姐，史塔克夫人，你还记得吗？”
The boy glanced at her blankly. “I think so,” he said, blinking, though he had been less than a year old the last time Catelyn had seen him.
小男孩一脸茫然地看着她。“好像记得。”他眨着眼说。凯特琳上次见他时，他还未满周岁。
Lysa seated herself near the fire and said, “Come to Mother, my sweet one.” She straightened his bedclothes and fussed with his fine brown hair. “Isn’t he beautiful? And strong too, don’t you believe the things you hear. Jon knew. The seed is strong , he told me. His last words. He kept saying Robert’s name, and he grabbed my arm so hard he left marks. Tell them, the seed is strong . His seed. He wanted everyone to know what a good strong boy my baby was going to be.”
莱莎在火炉边坐下。“小亲亲，到妈咪这儿来。”她整整他的睡衣，拨拨他的头发。“你看他漂不漂亮？其实他也很强壮，你别听信外边的传言。琼恩很清楚，他亲口对我说‘种性强韧’，这是他的临终遗言。他一直念叨着劳勃的名字，用力抓我的手，直到留下血痕。他是要我告诉他们，种性强韧，这是他的种，他要大家都知道我的小宝贝长大之后会变成个强壮的男子汉。”
“Lysa,” Catelyn said, “if you’re right about the Lannisters, all the more reason we must act quickly. We—”
“莱莎，”凯特琳道，“如果关于兰尼斯特家的情况属实，那我们应该赶紧采取行动。我们——”
“Not in front of the baby,” Lysa said. “He has a delicate temper, don’t you, sweet one?”
“不要在我宝贝面前谈这些。”莱莎说，“他的脾气很纤细，对不对啊，小亲亲？”
“The boy is Lord of the Eyrie and Defender of the Vale,” Catelyn reminded her, “and these are not times for delicacy. Ned thinks it may come to war.”
“这孩子是鹰巢城公爵，也是艾林谷的守护者。”凯特琳提醒她，“现在不是曲意温柔的时候。奈德认为依目前情势很可能会演变至战争。”
“Quiet!” Lysa snapped at her. “You’re scaring the boy.” Little Robert took a quick peek over his shoulder at Catelyn and began to tremble. His doll fell to the rushes, and he pressed himself against his mother. “Don’t be afraid, my sweet baby,” Lysa whispered. “Mother’s here, nothing will hurt you.” She opened her robe and drew out a pale, heavy breast, tipped with red. The boy grabbed for it eagerly, buried his face against her chest, and began to suck. Lysa stroked his hair.
“闭嘴！”莱莎怒叱。“你吓到孩子了。”小劳勃从她肩头偷偷望了凯特琳一眼，然后发起抖来。他的玩偶掉到地毯上，他则紧紧抱住母亲。“我亲爱的小宝贝，别怕喔。”莱莎轻声说，“妈咪在这里，不会有事的。”她掀开睡袍，拉出一只苍白但涨鼓鼓、奶头红润的乳房。男孩渴切地抓住它，把头埋在她胸口，吸吮了起来。莱莎抚弄着他的头发。
Catelyn was at a loss for words, Jon Arryn’s son , she thought incredulously. She remembered her own baby, three-year-old Rickon, half the age of this boy and five times as fierce. Small wonder the lords of the Vale were restive. For the first time she understood why the king had tried to take the child away from his mother to foster with the Lannisters …
凯特琳说不出话来。这竟然是琼恩·艾林的儿子，她难以置信地想。她想起了自己的小儿子，瑞肯才三岁，年纪只有这男孩的一半，却精力旺盛，足以当他好几倍有余。难怪艾林谷的诸侯们焦虑不安。她终于了解到国王为何要把这孩子从母亲身边带开，交给兰尼斯特家抚养……
“We’re safe here,” Lysa was saying. Whether to her or to the boy, Catelyn was not sure.
“在这里，我们不会有事。”莱莎说。至于这话究竟是对她说，还是对那孩子说，凯特琳无法确定。
“Don’t be a fool,” Catelyn said, the anger rising in her. “No one is safe. If you think hiding here will make the Lannisters forget you, you are sadly mistaken.”
“别傻了，”凯特琳道，怒意陡然从心中升起。“现在哪里都不安全。你以为躲在这里，兰尼斯特家就会忘记你的存在吗？你真是大错特错！”
Lysa covered her boy’s ear with her hand. “Even if they could bring an army through the mountains and past the Bloody Gate, the Eyrie is impregnable. You saw for yourself. No enemy could ever reach us up here.”
莱莎伸手捂住男孩的耳朵。“就算他们带兵杀进崇山峻岭，穿过血门，也不可能攻破鹰巢城。你自己也看到了，没有人能攻到这里。”
Catelyn wanted to slap her. Uncle Brynden had tried to warn her, she realized. “No castle is impregnable.”
凯特琳有种想甩她耳光的冲动。布林登叔叔试图警告她，她这才明白原因何在。“世上没有攻不破的城堡。”
“This one is,” Lysa insisted. “Everyone says so. The only thing is, what am I to do with this Imp you have brought me?”
“这座城堡就攻不破。”莱莎坚持，“而且每个人都知道。现在惟一的问题是，我该怎么处置你带来的这个小恶魔？”
“Is he a bad man?” the Lord of the Eyrie asked, his mother’s breast popping from his mouth, the nipple wet and red.
“他是坏人吗？”鹰巢城主松开口中红润潮湿的乳头问。
“A very bad man,” Lysa told him as she covered herself, “but Mother won’t let him harm my little baby.”
“他是个非常非常坏的人。”莱莎告诉他，一边穿好衣服。“但是妈咪不会让他欺负我的小亲亲。”
“Make him fly,” Robert said eagerly.
“让他飞。”劳勃急切地说。
Lysa stroked her son’s hair. “Perhaps we will,” she murmured. “Perhaps that is just what we will do.”
莱莎搓搓儿子的头发。“这主意不错，”她喃喃道，“这主意的确不错。”
*EDDARD
第三十六章 艾德
H e found Littlefinger in the brothel’s common room, chatting amiably with a tall, elegant woman who wore a feathered gown over skin as black as ink. By the hearth, Heward and a buxom wench were playing at forfeits. From the look of it, he’d lost his belt, his cloak, his mail shirt, and his right boot so far, while the girl had been forced to unbutton her shift to the waist. Jory Cassel stood beside a rain-streaked window with a wry smile on his face, watching Heward turn over tiles and enjoying the view.
他在妓院的前厅找到小指头，发现他正与一位身材高挑、举止优雅、全身黑如墨汁、穿着羽饰礼服的女士亲切交谈。火炉边，海华则和一位体态丰满的少女玩着猜瓦片的游戏。到目前为止，他已经输掉了皮带、披风、锁子甲和右脚的靴子，女孩则被迫从胸口一直解开到腰部的衣扣。乔里·凯索站在一扇滴雨如注的窗边，脸上挂着嘲弄的微笑，饶有兴味地看着海华输掉一件又一件衣服。
Ned paused at the foot of the stair and pulled on his gloves. “It’s time we took our leave. My business here is done.”
奈德停在楼梯口，戴上手套。“我的事已经办完，我们该走了。”
Heward lurched to his feet, hurriedly gathering up his things. “As you will, my lord,” Jory said. “I’ll help Wyl bring round the horses.” He strode to the door.
海华踉跄着站起来，急忙收拾他的东西。“是的，大人。”乔里道，“我去帮韦尔把马牵过来。”他朝门边走去。
Littlefinger took his time saying his farewells. He kissed the black woman’s hand, whispered some joke that made her laugh aloud, and sauntered over to Ned. “Your business,” he said lightly, “or Robert’s? They say the Hand dreams the king’s dreams, speaks with the king’s voice, and rules with the king’s sword. Does that also mean you fuck with the king’s—”
小指头慢条斯理地跟妓女话别。他吻了那黑女人的手，偷偷跟她说了句什么笑话，逗得她高声大笑，最后才神闲气定地走到奈德旁边。“你是自己办事，”他漫不经心地问，“还是替劳勃办事？听人说首相替国王作梦，用国王的声音说话，拿国王的宝剑治理国家，你该不会也是用国王的老二——”
“Lord Baelish,” Ned interrupted, “you presume too much. I am not ungrateful for your help. It might have taken us years to find this brothel without you. That does not mean I intend to endure your mockery. And I am no longer the King’s Hand.”
“贝里席大人，”奈德打断他。“请您别太不知好歹。我并非不感激您的帮忙。若是没有您，恐怕我们得花上几年时间才能找到这家妓院。但那不代表我愿意忍受您的嘲弄，更何况我已经不是首相了。”
“The direwolf must be a prickly beast,” said Littlefinger with a sharp twist of his mouth.
“我看冰原狼跟刺猬没什么两样嘛。”小指头夸张地撇撇嘴。
A warm rain was pelting down from a starless black sky as they walked to the stables. Ned drew up the hood of his cloak. Jory brought out his horse. Young Wyl came right behind him, leading Littlefinger’s mare with one hand while the other fumbled with his belt and the lacings of his trousers. A barefoot whore leaned out of the stable door, giggling at him.
他们走进马厩时，屋外无星的黑色夜空正下着一阵温暖的雨。奈德拉起兜帽，乔里牵来他的坐骑，年轻的韦尔紧跟在后，一手领着小指头的母马，另一只手忙着系好皮带拉紧长裤。一个赤脚的妓女从马厩门里探出头来，对他咯咯直笑。
“Will we be going back to the castle now, my lord?” Jory asked. Ned nodded and swung into the saddle. Littlefinger mounted up beside him. Jory and the others followed.
“大人，我们这就回城堡吗？”乔里问。奈德点点头，翻身上马。小指头骑行在他身边，乔里和其他人也跟着照办。
“Chataya runs a choice establishment,” Littlefinger said as they rode. “I’ve half a mind to buy it. Brothels are a much sounder investment than ships, I’ve found. Whores seldom sink, and when they are boarded by pirates, why, the pirates pay good coin like everyone else.” Lord Petyr chuckled at his own wit.
“莎塔雅这家店实在挺不赖，”途中小指头说，“有时候我还真想把它给买下来。我发现买妓院远比投资船队来得稳当，因为妓女不会沉，而海盗跳到她们身上的时候，唉，照样也得付钱哪。”培提尔伯爵笑道，似乎对自己的幽默颇感满意。
Ned let him prattle on. After a time, he quieted and they rode in silence. The streets of King’s Landing were dark and deserted. The rain had driven everyone under their roofs. It beat down on Ned’s head, warm as blood and relentless as old guilts. Fat drops of water ran down his face.
奈德让他自说自话，过了一会儿，他也静了下来，他们便沉默地骑马前行。君临的街道阴暗而无人迹，大雨把所有的人都赶进了屋里。这雨不断敲打着奈德的头，温热如血，无情一如萦绕心头的过往罪衍。大颗水珠流下他的脸庞。
“Robert will never keep to one bed,” Lyanna had told him at Winterfell, on the night long ago when their father had promised her hand to the young Lord of Storm’s End. “I hear he has gotten a child on some girl in the Vale.” Ned had held the babe in his arms; he could scarcely deny her, nor would he lie to his sister, but he had assured her that what Robert did before their betrothal was of no matter, that he was a good man and true who would love her with all his heart. Lyanna had only smiled. “Love is sweet, dearest Ned, but it cannot change a man’s nature.”
“劳勃永不会安于一室。”许久许久以前，在他们的父亲把她许配给风息堡年轻公爵的那个晚上，莱安娜在临冬城对他这么说。“我听说他在艾林谷跟一个女孩生了孩子。”奈德自己便抱过那婴孩，实在无法否认她的话，况且他又不愿欺骗妹妹，便向她保证不论劳勃在婚约之前干过什么风流事，都无足轻重，因为他是个情感真诚的好人，全心全意地爱着她。然而，莱安娜只是笑笑。“我最亲爱的奈德啊，爱情诚然可贵，却终究无法改变一个人的本性。”
The girl had been so young Ned had not dared to ask her age. No doubt she’d been a virgin; the better brothels could always find a virgin, if the purse was fat enough. She had light red hair and a powdering of freckles across the bridge of her nose, and when she slipped free a breast to give her nipple to the babe, he saw that her bosom was freckled as well. “I named her Barra,” she said as the child nursed. “She looks so like him, does she not, milord? She has his nose, and his hair …”
刚才那女孩年纪之轻，奈德甚至不敢问她几岁。她原本毫无疑问是个黄花闺女，在稍微高级一点的妓院里，只要钱包够肥，就一定能找到这样的货色。她长了一头淡红的头发，鼻梁两边各有一点雀斑，当她解开衣服，用奶头哺喂婴儿的时候，他发现她的胸部也有雀斑。“我给她取名芭拉，”孩子一边吸奶，她一边说，“大人，她跟他长得可真像，不是吗？她有他的鼻子，还有他的头发……”
“She does.” Eddard Stark had touched the baby’s fine, dark hair. It flowed through his fingers like black silk. Robert’s firstborn had had the same fine hair, he seemed to recall.
“的确很像。”艾德·史塔克已经摸过婴儿柔细的深色头发，发丝有如黑丝滑过他的手指。他隐约记得，劳勃的第一个孩子也有着同样的纤细黑发。
“Tell him that when you see him, milord, as it … as it please you. Tell him how beautiful she is.”
“大人，您见到他的时候，如果您高兴的话……请您告诉他，告诉他她有多漂亮。”
“I will,” Ned had promised her. That was his curse. Robert would swear undying love and forget them before evenfall, but Ned Stark kept his vows. He thought of the promises he’d made Lyanna as she lay dying, and the price he’d paid to keep them.
“我会的。”奈德答应她。这是他的命。劳勃可以誓言真爱不渝，然后在天黑以前就忘得一干二净，然而奈德·史塔克信守承诺。他想起莱安娜临终之际他所许下的承诺，以及为了遵守誓言付出的种种代价。
“And tell him I’ve not been with no one else. I swear it, milord, by the old gods and new. Chataya said I could have half a year, for the baby, and for hoping he’d come back. So you’ll tell him I’m waiting, won’t you? I don’t want no jewels or nothing, just him. He was always good to me, truly.”
“请告诉他我没跟过其他人。大人，我以新神与旧神之名起誓。莎塔雅说我可以将养半年，照顾孩子，同时看他会不会回来。所以请您告诉他我在等他，好不好？我不要金银珠宝，我只要他的人。他对我一直很好，真的。”
Good to you , Ned thought hollowly. “I will tell him, child, and I promise you, Barra shall not go wanting.”
对你很好，奈德的思绪好空虚。“孩子，我会告诉他的。我向你保证，芭拉永不会愁吃愁穿。”
She had smiled then, a smile so tremulous and sweet that it cut the heart out of him. Riding through the rainy night, Ned saw Jon Snow’s face in front of him, so like a younger version of his own. If the gods frowned so on bastards, he thought dully, why did they fill men with such lusts? “Lord Baelish, what do you know of Robert’s bastards?”
听到这话，她笑了，笑得很害怕，却又很甜，看得他心如刀割。骑马走在雨夜，奈德看见琼恩·雪诺的脸出现在眼前，几乎就是年轻时的自己。倘若众神如此厌恶私生儿，他闷闷地想，那么又为何要让男人充满欲望？“贝里席大人，你对劳勃的私生子女所知多少？”
“Well, he has more than you, for a start.”
“这个嘛，从最简单的说起，他生得比你多。”
“How many?”
“多多少？”
Littlefinger shrugged. Rivulets of moisture twisted down the back of his cloak. “Does it matter? If you bed enough women, some will give you presents, and His Grace has never been shy on that count. I know he’s acknowledged that boy at Storm’s End, the one he fathered the night Lord Stannis wed. He could hardly do otherwise. The mother was a Florent, niece to the Lady Selyse, one of her bedmaids. Renly says that Robert carried the girl upstairs during the feast, and broke in the wedding bed while Stannis and his bride were still dancing. Lord Stannis seemed to think that was a blot on the honor of his wife’s House, so when the boy was born, he shipped him off to Renly.” He gave Ned a sideways glance. “I’ve also heard whispers that Robert got a pair of twins on a serving wench at Casterly Rock, three years ago when he went west for Lord Tywin’s tourney. Cersei had the babes killed, and sold the mother to a passing slaver. Too much an affront to Lannister pride, that close to home.”
小指头耸肩，雨珠立刻汇集成小溪从他斗篷背后流下。“有关系吗？反正只要睡过的女人够多，总有人会送你大礼，而国王陛下在这方面可从不吝啬。我知道他公开承认的那个风息堡男孩，那是在史坦尼斯大人结婚当晚搞上的。他没法不认，孩子的母亲是佛罗伦家的人，赛丽丝夫人的堂妹，她本人又是她的侍女之一。蓝礼说劳勃在当晚宴会进行途中把那女孩抱上楼，在史坦尼斯和新娘跳舞的时候就在他们婚床上开了她的苞。史坦尼斯大人似乎认为这是他太太娘家名誉的大污点，所以等男孩一出生，便把他装船送到蓝礼那边去了。”他斜眼看看奈德。“我还听说三年前劳勃去西境参加泰温大人的比武大会时，跟凯岩城一个女侍生了对双胞胎。瑟曦派人把孩子杀了，孩子的娘则卖给路过的奴隶贩子。自家后院出这种事，兰尼斯特家哪受得了。”
Ned Stark grimaced. Ugly tales like that were told of every great lord in the realm. He could believe it of Cersei Lannister readily enough … but would the king stand by and let it happen? The Robert he had known would not have, but the Robert he had known had never been so practiced at shutting his eyes to things he did not wish to see. “Why would Jon Arryn take a sudden interest in the king’s baseborn children?”
奈德·史塔克听了不禁皱眉，王国各大家族都有类似的难听传闻。他相信瑟曦·兰尼斯特干得出这种事……但国王会袖手旁观，任她胡来吗？他过去所认识的那个劳勃不会，可话说回来，他过去所认识的那个劳勃，也不像如今这般善于对自己不想知道的事装聋作哑。“琼恩·艾林为什么突然对国王的庶出子女产生了兴趣？”
The short man gave a sodden shrug. “He was the King’s Hand. Doubtless Robert asked him to see that they were provided for.”
浑身湿透的矮个子耸耸肩。“他是御前首相，想必劳勃要他代为照顾吧。”
Ned was soaked through to the bone, and his soul had grown cold. “It had to be more than that, or why kill him?”
奈德被雨淋湿到骨子里去，他的心整个凉了。“一定不止这样，否则干嘛杀他？”
Littlefinger shook the rain from his hair and laughed. “Now I see. Lord Arryn learned that His Grace had filled the bellies of some whores and fishwives, and for that he had to be silenced. Small wonder. Allow a man like that to live, and next he’s like to blurt out that the sun rises in the east.”
小指头甩开头发上的雨珠，笑道：“原来如此。想必是因为艾林大人知道国王陛下把一堆妓女和渔姑肚子搞大的底细，不得已只好将他灭口。这也难怪，若让这种人活下去，下次他就要说太阳从东边出来啰。”
There was no answer Ned Stark could give to that but a frown. For the first time in years, he found himself remembering Rhaegar Targaryen. He wondered if Rhaegar had frequented brothels; somehow he thought not.
奈德·史塔克想不出如何回答，只有皱眉。这么多年来，他发现自己头一遭回忆起雷加·坦格利安。他很好奇雷加是否也常光顾妓院，不知为什么，他相信没有。
The rain was falling harder now, stinging the eyes and drumming against the ground. Rivers of black water were running down the hill when Jory called out, “My lord,” his voice hoarse with alarm. And in an instant, the street was full of soldiers.
雨势转大，刺痛他的双眼，轰然敲打地面。黑色的浊流从丘陵往下倾泻，这时乔里喊道：“老爷！”他嘶哑的声音里带着警觉。转眼间，街道上满满的都是兵士。
Ned glimpsed ringmail over leather, gauntlets and greaves, steel helms with golden lions on the crests. Their cloaks clung to their backs, sodden with rain. He had no time to count, but there were ten at least, a line of them, on foot, blocking the street, with longswords and iron-tipped spears. “Behind!” he heard Wyl cry, and when he turned his horse, there were more in back of them, cutting off their retreat. Jory’s sword came singing from its scabbard. “Make way or die!”
奈德瞥见他们皮衣外罩着环甲、铁手套和护膝，戴着金狮修饰的钢盔，被雨浸湿的披风紧紧贴在背上。他无暇细数，但起码有十个，排成一列，徒步挡住去路，手持长剑和铁枪。“后面！”他听见韦尔大喊，他调转马头，发现后面有更多人，切断了他们的退路。乔里的剑铮地一声出鞘。“挡路者死！”
“The wolves are howling,” their leader said. Ned could see rain running down his face. “Such a small pack, though.”
“狼在叫了。”对方的领队说。奈德可以看见雨水流下他的脸庞。“可惜是小小一群。”
Littlefinger walked his horse forward, step by careful step. “What is the meaning of this? This is the Hand of the King.”
小指头小心翼翼地策马向前。“你这是什么意思？这可是国王的首相。”
“He was the Hand of the King.” The mud muffled the hooves of the blood bay stallion. The line parted before him. On a golden breastplate, the lion of Lannister roared its defiance. “Now, if truth be told, I’m not sure what he is.”
“国王的前任首相。”泥泞模糊了枣红骏马的蹄声，面前的士兵分成两列，金盔金甲的兰尼斯特雄狮桀骜不驯地吼道。“至于现在嘛，说实话，我不知道他算老几。”
“Lannister, this is madness,” Littlefinger said. “Let us pass. We are expected back at the castle. What do you think you’re doing?”
“兰尼斯特，你疯了不成？”小指头道，“快让我们过去，我们该回城了。你到底想干什么？”
“He knows what he’s doing,” Ned said calmly.
“他很清楚自己在干什么。”奈德平静地说。
Jaime Lannister smiled. “Quite true. I’m looking for my brother. You remember my brother, don’t you, Lord Stark? He was with us at Winterfell. Fair-haired, mismatched eyes, sharp of tongue. A short man.”
詹姆·兰尼斯特微笑道：“此话不假。我在找我老弟。史塔克大人，您还记得我弟弟吧，是不是？我们到临冬城去的时候，他还跟我们一道呢。金头发，大小眼，舌头利，个子矮。”
“I remember him well,” Ned replied.
“我记得非常清楚。”奈德回答。
“It would seem he has met some trouble on the road. My lord father is quite vexed. You would not perchance have any notion of who might have wished my brother ill, would you?”
“他似乎在半路上碰到点麻烦。家父为此甚感焦虑。您该不会又正巧知道谁想对我弟弟不利吧，是不是？”
“Your brother has been taken at my command, to answer for his crimes,” Ned Stark said.
“令弟乃是在我的命令下遭到逮捕，以为其罪行负责。”
Littlefinger groaned in dismay. “My lords—”
小指头沮丧地呻吟道：“两位大人——”
Ser Jaime ripped his longsword from its sheath and urged his stallion forward. “Show me your steel, Lord Eddard. I’ll butcher you like Aerys if I must, but I’d sooner you died with a blade in your hand.” He gave Littlefinger a cool, contemptuous glance. “Lord Baelish, I’d leave here in some haste if I did not care to get bloodstains on my costly clothing.”
詹姆爵士自鞘里拔出长剑，踢马向前。“拔剑罢，艾德大人。虽然我恨不得像杀伊里斯那样宰了你，但我宁愿你死的时候手里拿着武器。”他冰冷而轻蔑地看了小指头一眼。“贝里席大人，若你不想身上的漂亮衣服沾上血迹，我建议你尽快离开。”
Littlefinger did not need to be urged. “I will bring the City Watch,” he promised Ned. The Lannister line parted to let him through, and closed behind him. Littlefinger put his heels to his mare and vanished around a corner.
小指头无需催促。“我这就去找都城守卫队。”他向奈德保证。兰尼斯特家的士兵向外站开，之后又复成包围阵形。小指头一踢马肚，骑着母马消失在街角。
Ned’s men had drawn their swords, but they were three against twenty. Eyes watched from nearby windows and doors, but no one was about to intervene. His party was mounted, the Lannisters on foot save for Jaime himself. A charge might win them free, but it seemed to Eddard Stark that they had a surer, safer tactic. “Kill me,” he warned the Kingslayer, “and Catelyn will most certainly slay Tyrion.”
奈德的手下也拔出了武器，但他们是三对二十。附近居民在门窗后暗中观望，无人打算干涉。他的部下都骑马，而兰尼斯特家的人除了詹姆都是徒步。冲锋或许能杀出一条血路，但艾德·史塔克认为还有更保险、更安全的策略。“你杀了我，”他警告弑君者。“凯特琳手中的提利昂也性命难保。”
Jaime Lannister poked at Ned’s chest with the gilded sword that had sipped the blood of the last of the Dragonkings. “Would she? The noble Catelyn Tully of Riverrun murder a hostage? I think … not.” He sighed. “But I am not willing to chance my brother’s life on a woman’s honor.” Jaime slid the golden sword into its sheath. “So I suppose I’ll let you run back to Robert to tell him how I frightened you. I wonder if he’ll care.” Jaime pushed his wet hair back with his fingers and wheeled his horse around. When he was beyond the line of swordsmen, he glanced back at his captain. “Tregar, see that no harm comes to Lord Stark.”
詹姆·兰尼斯特用那把曾啜饮末代龙王鲜血的镀金宝剑戳戳奈德胸膛。“她会吗？奔流城高贵的凯特琳·徒利谋害毫无反抗能力的人质？我看……她不会。”他叹口气，“但我可不想拿我弟弟的性命来跟一个女人的荣誉感作赌。”詹姆将黄金宝剑回鞘。“这样看来，我只好让你跑去跟劳勃告状，说我是如何欺负你了。我很怀疑他会不会理你？”詹姆伸手把湿发往后一拨，调转马头。当他骑马经过那排武士时，他回头瞄了队长一眼。“崔格，不许伤害史塔克大人。”
“As you say, m’lord.”
“遵命，大人。”
“Still … we wouldn’t want him to leave here entirely unchastened, so”—through the night and the rain, he glimpsed the white of Jaime’s smile—“kill his men.”
“可是……也不能让他平白逃过一劫，所以呢，”——穿过夜色和大雨，他依稀看到詹姆的微笑——“把他手下给我全宰了。”
“No!” Ned Stark screamed, clawing for his sword. Jaime was already cantering off down the street as he heard Wyl shout. Men closed from both sides. Ned rode one down, cutting at phantoms in red cloaks who gave way before him. Jory Cassel put his heels into his mount and charged. A steel-shod hoof caught a Lannister guardsman in the face with a sickening crunch . A second man reeled away and for an instant Jory was free. Wyl cursed as they pulled him off his dying horse, swords slashing in the rain. Ned galloped to him, bringing his longsword down on Tregar’s helm. The jolt of impact made him grit his teeth. Tregar stumbled to his knees, his lion crest sheared in half, blood running down his face. Heward was hacking at the hands that had seized his bridle when a spear caught him in the belly. Suddenly Jory was back among them, a red rain flying from his sword. “No!” Ned shouted. “Jory, away!” Ned’s horse slipped under him and came crashing down in the mud. There was a moment of blinding pain and the taste of blood in his mouth.
“不！”奈德·史塔克尖叫着抓起他的剑。他听见韦尔大声喊叫，詹姆早已快马加鞭扬长而去。敌人从四面八方围过来。奈德踩翻一人，挥剑朝着周围纷纷避开、幽灵般的红披风猛砍。乔里一夹马肚往前冲，精钢打造的马蹄铁正好踢中一名士兵的脸，发出一声令人作呕的喀啦响。第二个人避了开来，刹那间乔里似乎自由了。那边韦尔大声咒骂，被他们硬是从垂死的马背上拖下去，剑如雨下。奈德策马朝他飞奔而去，一剑砍中崔格的头盔，冲力震得他咬紧牙关。崔格踉跄着跪下，盔顶的狮子裂成两半，血汩汩地流下脸庞。海华正挥砍着几只抓住他腰带的手，却被一枝长枪刺穿了肚腹。只见乔里回头冲入杀阵，长剑挑起一阵腥风血雨。“不要过来！”奈德高喊，“乔里，快走！”奈德的坐骑滑了一跤，轰隆隆摔进烂泥堆里。他只觉一阵刺眼的剧痛，以及嘴里的血腥。
He saw them cut the legs from Jory’s mount and drag him to the earth, swords rising and falling as they closed in around him. When Ned’s horse lurched back to its feet, he tried to rise, only to fall again, choking on his scream. He could see the splintered bone poking through his calf. It was the last thing he saw for a time. The rain came down and down and down.
他看见他们砍断乔里坐骑的腿，把他拖在地上，围上去剑起剑落。奈德的马蹒跚着站起来，他也试图起身，却无力地倒下，极力忍住方才没有尖叫出声。他看见戳穿小腿的碎骨。那是他很长一段时间里最后看到的东西。雨，一直下，一直下，一直下。
When he opened his eyes again, Lord Eddard Stark was alone with his dead. His horse moved closer, caught the rank scent of blood, and galloped away. Ned began to drag himself through the mud, gritting his teeth at the agony in his leg. It seemed to take years. Faces watched from candlelit windows, and people began to emerge from alleys and doors, but no one moved to help.
当艾德·史塔克公爵再度睁眼时，身边只剩死人。他的坐骑靠了过来，闻到浓厚的血腥味，便又拔腿跑开。奈德拖着身子爬过泥泞，腿部传来的剧痛疼得他咬紧牙关。他爬啊爬，仿佛花了好多年。一张张脸从透着烛光的窗户边探出来，居民渐渐从小巷和房屋内走出，但没有人伸出援手。
Littlefinger and the City Watch found him there in the street, cradling Jory Cassel’s body in his arms.
当小指头和都城守卫队找到他时，他坐在街上，怀中抱着乔里·凯索的尸体。
Somewhere the gold cloaks found a litter, but the trip back to the castle was a blur of agony, and Ned lost consciousness more than once. He remembered seeing the Red Keep looming ahead of him in the first grey light of dawn. The rain had darkened the pale pink stone of the massive walls to the color of blood.
金袍卫士不知从哪儿弄来了担架。回城堡的路上奈德痛得睁不开眼，几度失去意识。他记得在灰蒙蒙的晨光之中，红堡耸立在面前。大雨把原本粉白的石造城墙染成一片血红。
Then Grand Maester Pycelle was looming over him, holding a cup, whispering, “Drink, my lord. Here. The milk of the poppy, for your pain.” He remembered swallowing, and Pycelle was telling someone to heat the wine to boiling and fetch him clean silk, and that was the last he knew.
随后，派席尔大学士突然出现在身边，手拿杯子，轻声说：“大人，把这喝了。来，这是罂粟花奶，可以为您止痛。”他记得自己喝了下去，接着派席尔吩咐某人把葡萄酒煮沸，再拿条干净毛巾。之后，他就什么也听不见了。
*DAENERYS
第三十七章 丹妮莉丝
T he Horse Gate of Vaes Dothrak was made of two gigantic bronze stallions, rearing, their hooves meeting a hundred feet above the roadway to form a pointed arch.
维斯·多斯拉克的“马门”乃是两匹巨大的青铜骏马，后足站立，前脚高跃，四蹄相会于离路面百余尺的高空，形成一个尖顶圆弧。
Dany could not have said why the city needed a gate when it had no walls … and no buildings that she could see. Yet there it stood, immense and beautiful, the great horses framing the distant purple mountain beyond. The bronze stallions threw long shadows across the waving grasses as Khal Drogo led the khalasar under their hooves and down the godsway, his bloodriders beside him.
丹妮实在不了解，这座城既无围墙，何需城门？……犹有甚者，她举目所及居然没有半栋建筑。然而马门依旧矗立在此，硕大无比，美丽逼人，两匹大马为远方紫色山峦的风景加上了边框。卓戈卡奥领着卡拉萨从它们的马蹄下经过，沿着诸神大道继续前行，血盟卫们紧随左右，青铜骏马则在碧波荡漾的草原上洒下迆长的影子。
Dany followed on her silver, escorted by Ser Jorah Mormont and her brother Viserys, mounted once more. After the day in the grass when she had left him to walk back to the khalasar , the Dothraki had laughingly called him Khal Rhae Mhar , the Sorefoot King. Khal Drogo had offered him a place in a cart the next day, and Viserys had accepted. In his stubborn ignorance, he had not even known he was being mocked; the carts were for eunuchs, cripples, women giving birth, the very young and the very old. That won him yet another name: Khal Rhaggat , the Cart King. Her brother had thought it was the khal’s way of apologizing for the wrong Dany had done him. She had begged Ser Jorah not to tell him the truth, lest he be shamed. The knight had replied that the king could well do with a bit of shame … yet he had done as she bid. It had taken much pleading, and all the pillow tricks Doreah had taught her, before Dany had been able to make Drogo relent and allow Viserys to rejoin them at the head of the column.
丹妮骑着银马跟随在后，护送她的是乔拉·莫尔蒙爵士和再度上马的哥哥韦赛里斯。自那天在草原上发生事故，她让他走路回卡拉萨后，多斯拉克人便语带讥讽地给他起了个绰号叫雷马尔卡奥，意思是“酸腿国王”。次日卓戈卡奥提议让他搭乘马车，韦赛里斯答应下来。倔强又无知的他，却不知这正是对他嘲弄。因为只有太监、残废、孕妇和老弱幼孺才搭马车。为此他又得了个新译名拉迦特卡奥，意思是“马车国王”。哥哥竟还以为卡奥是因为丹妮犯了错，想藉此向他赔礼。她特别恳求乔拉爵士别告诉他真相，以免他受辱。骑士回说作国王就是要能忍受些许侮辱……但他还是听了她的话。如今丹妮可是再三哀求，又用尽多莉亚教的床上功夫，才让卓戈收回成命，允许韦赛里斯重新和他们一起走在队伍前端。
“Where is the city?” she asked as they passed beneath the bronze arch. There were no buildings to be seen, no people, only the grass and the road, lined with ancient monuments from all the lands the Dothraki had sacked over the centuries.
“城区究竟在哪儿？”他们从青铜拱门下穿过时，她忍不住问。放眼望去，四下没有建筑物，没有人烟，只有草原和道路，两旁摆满了千百年来多斯拉克人由各地搜刮来的古老掠获。
“Ahead,” Ser Jorah answered. “Under the mountain.”
“前面，”乔拉爵士回答，“就在山脚下。”
Beyond the horse gate, plundered gods and stolen heroes loomed to either side of them. The forgotten deities of dead cities brandished their broken thunderbolts at the sky as Dany rode her silver past their feet. Stone kings looked down on her from their thrones, their faces chipped and stained, even their names lost in the mists of time. Lithe young maidens danced on marble plinths, draped only in flowers, or poured air from shattered jars. Monsters stood in the grass beside the road; black iron dragons with jewels for eyes, roaring griffins, manticores with their barbed tails poised to strike, and other beasts she could not name. Some of the statues were so lovely they took her breath away, others so misshapen and terrible that Dany could scarcely bear to look at them. Those, Ser Jorah said, had likely come from the Shadow Lands beyond Asshai.
过了马门，抢窃而来的各方诸神和列位英雄凛然站立道路左右。丹妮骑着小银马经过曾被衰亡城市敬拜过的、如今早被遗忘的神祉，有的还朝天挥舞手中的闪电。众多国王的石雕坐在王位上，冷冷地俯视她，他们的面容却已被风雨侵蚀，连名字也失落于时间的迷雾中。身躯苗条的少女在大理石基座上跳舞，身上仅有花朵蔽体，她们拿着碎裂的瓶罐，倒出的也只有空气。站在道路两边的青草地上的还有各种怪物：眼镶珠宝的黑铁龙，狰狞咆哮的鹰头狮身兽，举尾欲刺的人面狮身蝎尾兽，以及其他不知名的怪兽。有些雕像可爱得教她透不过气，却也有些极度畸形可怖，令她不敢再看。照乔拉爵士说，这些雕像大半来自亚夏彼方的阴影之地。
“So many,” she said as her silver stepped slowly onward, “and from so many lands.”
“好多啊，”小银马一边缓步向前，她一边说，“也是从好多地方来的。”
Viserys was less impressed. “The trash of dead cities,” he sneered. He was careful to speak in the Common Tongue, which few Dothraki could understand, yet even so Dany found herself glancing back at the men of her khas , to make certain he had not been overheard. He went on blithely. “All these savages know how to do is steal the things better men have built … and kill.” He laughed. “They do know how to kill. Otherwise I’d have no use for them at all.”
韦赛里斯可不怎么感兴趣。“全是些毁灭的城市留下来的垃圾。”他冷笑道。他这句话是特别用通用语说的，因为没几个多斯拉克人听得懂，然而丹妮还是忍不住回头看看自己卡斯的人，以确定没人听见。他倒是满不在乎地继续说下去。“这些野蛮人只懂得窃取文明人现成的建筑……还有杀人。”他笑道，“但他们也真是会杀人，否则我找他们干嘛？”
“They are my people now,” Dany said. “You should not call them savages, brother.”
“他们现在也是我的族人，”丹妮说，“哥哥，你就别再叫他们野蛮人了吧。”
“The dragon speaks as he likes,” Viserys said … in the Common Tongue. He glanced over his shoulder at Aggo and Rakharo, riding behind them, and favored them with a mocking smile. “See, the savages lack the wit to understand the speech of civilized men.” A moss-eaten stone monolith loomed over the road, fifty feet tall. Viserys gazed at it with boredom in his eyes. “How long must we linger amidst these ruins before Drogo gives me my army? I grow tired of waiting.”
“真龙传人爱说什么就说什么。”韦赛里斯道……依然是用通用语。他回头瞄了一眼骑在后面的阿戈和拉卡洛，给了他们一个嘲弄的微笑。“你瞧，这些野蛮人没脑袋，听不懂文明人的话。”路边矗立着一座爬满青苔的巨石柱，足足有五十英尺高。韦赛里斯百无聊赖地看着石柱，“我们到底还要在这些废墟里待多久，卓戈才会给我军队？我等得不耐烦了。”
“The princess must be presented to the dosh khaleen …”
“公主殿下必须先晋见多希卡林……”
“The crones, yes,” her brother interrupted, “and there’s to be some mummer’s show of a prophecy for the whelp in her belly, you told me. What is that to me? I’m tired of eating horsemeat and I’m sick of the stink of these savages.” He sniffed at the wide, floppy sleeve of his tunic, where it was his custom to keep a sachet. It could not have helped much. The tunic was filthy. All the silk and heavy wools that Viserys had worn out of Pentos were stained by hard travel and rotted from sweat.
“见几个老太婆，我知道。”哥哥插话，“照你所说，之后还要演场闹剧，预言她肚里的小东西。这与我何干？我受够了天天吃马肉，还有这些野蛮人的臭味。”他朝自己宽大的衣袖闻了闻，他习惯在袖子里缝个香袋，但作用非常有限，因为外衣本身就又脏又臭。韦赛里斯当初从潘托斯穿出来的丝绸羊毛，早已在长途跋涉中沾满泥渍，并因汗水而腐烂了。
Ser Jorah Mormont said, “The Western Market will have food more to your taste, Your Grace. The traders from the Free Cities come there to sell their wares. The khal will honor his promise in his own time.”
乔拉·莫尔蒙爵士道：“陛下，城西市集里的东西应该合您胃口。自由贸易城邦的生意人在那里做买卖，甚至会有七国的商贩来此。至于卡奥，相信他会挑适当的时机履行承诺。”
“He had better,” Viserys said grimly. “I was promised a crown, and I mean to have it. The dragon is not mocked.” Spying an obscene likeness of a woman with six breasts and a ferret’s head, he rode off to inspect it more closely.
“他最好动作快点。”韦赛里斯冷冷地说，“他答应给我一顶王冠，我可是打定主意非拿到手不可，谁也别想拿真龙寻开心。”这时他瞥见一尊形似女人，有着六个乳房和一个貂头的猥亵雕像，便骑马过去看个仔细。
Dany was relieved, yet no less anxious. “I pray that my sun-and-stars will not keep him waiting too long,” she told Ser Jorah when her brother was out of earshot.
丹妮松了口气，却依旧不安。“我衷心期望我的日和星不会让他久等。”哥哥离开听力范围后，她这么告诉乔拉爵士。
The knight looked after Viserys doubtfully. “Your brother should have bided his time in Pentos. There is no place for him in a khalasar . Illyrio tried to warn him.”
骑士怀疑地望着韦赛里斯的背影。“您哥哥应该留在潘托斯等待时机。卡拉萨里不适合他待，伊利里欧也告诫过他。”
“He will go as soon as he has his ten thousand. My lord husband promised a golden crown.”
“一旦得到那一万精兵，他就会离开。我夫君承诺要给他一顶黄金王冠。”
Ser Jorah grunted. “Yes, Khaleesi , but … the Dothraki look on these things differently than we do in the west. I have told him as much, as Illyrio told him, but your brother does not listen. The horselords are no traders. Viserys thinks he sold you, and now he wants his price. Yet Khal Drogo would say he had you as a gift. He will give Viserys a gift in return, yes … in his own time. You do not demand a gift, not of a khal . You do not demand anything of a khal.”
乔拉爵士咕哝道：“卡丽熙，我知道，可是……多斯拉克人的行事作风与我们西方人不同。我跟他说过几次，伊利里欧也谈过，但您哥哥不听。马王并非生意人，韦赛里斯认为他把您卖了，现在想要收账，然而卓戈卡奥将您视为他的礼物，他会以礼回赠韦赛里斯……只不过什么时候送取决于他。您不能主动开口问他要礼物，对卡奥不能这样。开口跟卡奥要任何东西都是行不通的。”
“It is not right to make him wait.” Dany did not know why she was defending her brother, yet she was. “Viserys says he could sweep the Seven Kingdoms with ten thousand Dothraki screamers.”
“可叫他这样干等却也不对。”丹妮不知自己为何要为哥哥辩护，总之她开了口。“韦赛里斯说有了一万名多斯拉克哮吼武士，他可以横扫七国全境。”
Ser Jorah snorted. “Viserys could not sweep a stable with ten thousand brooms.”
乔拉爵士哼了一声。“给韦赛里斯一万把扫把，他也没法把一座马厩打扫干净。”
Dany could not pretend to surprise at the disdain in his tone. “What … what if it were not Viserys?” she asked. “If it were someone else who led them? Someone stronger? Could the Dothraki truly conquer the Seven Kingdoms?”
对他的轻蔑口吻，丹妮实在是不能佯作吃惊。“那……那如果不是韦赛里斯呢？”她问，“如果换个人？换个更强的人领军呢？多斯拉克人果真能征服七国吗？”
Ser Jorah’s face grew thoughtful as their horses trod together down the godsway. “When I first went into exile, I looked at the Dothraki and saw half-naked barbarians, as wild as their horses. If you had asked me then, Princess, I should have told you that a thousand good knights would have no trouble putting to flight a hundred times as many Dothraki.”
他们继续沿着诸神大道走下去，乔拉爵士则陷入沉思。“当初刚遭放逐，我也是把多斯拉克人视为衣不蔽体、跟他们的马同样野性难驯的化外蛮子。公主殿下，若那时候您问起我这个问题，我会毫不犹豫地告诉您只需一千名训练有素的骑士，便足以使上百倍的多斯拉克人抱头鼠窜。”
“But if I asked you now?”
“现在呢？”
“Now,” the knight said, “I am less certain. They are better riders than any knight, utterly fearless, and their bows outrange ours. In the Seven Kingdoms, most archers fight on foot, from behind a shieldwall or a barricade of sharpened stakes. The Dothraki fire from horseback, charging or retreating, it makes no matter, they are full as deadly … and there are so many of them, my lady. Your lord husband alone counts forty thousand mounted warriors in his khalasar.”
“现在的话，”骑士道，“我就不敢确定。他们的马术胜过任何骑士，天不怕地不怕，弓箭的射程也远超过我们。七国的弓箭手多半徒步，躲在盾牌围成的墙壁或是削尖的木桩做成的工事后面。多斯拉克人却是骑马射箭，无论冲锋撤退都行动自如。公主殿下，他们非常危险……而他们的数量也同样惊人。您夫君大人的卡拉萨足足拥有四万骑马战士。”
“Is that truly so many?”
“四万人真的很多？”
“Your brother Rhaegar brought as many men to the Trident,” Ser Jorah admitted, “but of that number, no more than a tenth were knights. The rest were archers, freeriders, and foot soldiers armed with spears and pikes. When Rhaegar fell, many threw down their weapons and fled the field. How long do you imagine such a rabble would stand against the charge of forty thousand screamers howling for blood? How well would boiled leather jerkins and mailed shirts protect them when the arrows fall like rain?”
“当年您哥哥雷加，便是带着这么多人到三叉戟河作战，”乔拉爵士说，“但其中只有不到十分之一是骑士，其余都是流浪骑手、弓箭手，以及拿枪矛的步兵。雷加一死，很多人便丢下武器，逃离战场。面对四万名嗜血哮吼武士的决死冲锋，你觉得这样的乌合之众能支撑多久？置身箭如雨下的杀戮战场，身穿硬皮革和锁子甲，又能有多大效用？”
“Not long,” she said, “not well.”
“撑不久，”她说，“也没什么用。”
He nodded. “Mind you, Princess, if the lords of the Seven Kingdoms have the wit the gods gave a goose, it will never come to that. The riders have no taste for siegecraft. I doubt they could take even the weakest castle in the Seven Kingdoms, but if Robert Baratheon were fool enough to give them battle …”
他点点头。“可是公主殿下，容我提醒您，只要诸神赐予七国的领主一点点脑子，他们就不至于沦落到那种地步。草原的骑马战士对围城完全不在行，能不能攻下七国里最弱的城堡，我都很怀疑。但若是劳勃·拜拉席恩愚蠢到跟他们正面决战……”
“Is he?” Dany asked. “A fool, I mean?”
“他是这样的人吗？”丹妮问：“我的意思是，他愚蠢吗？”
Ser Jorah considered that for a moment. “Robert should have been born Dothraki,” he said at last. “Your khal would tell you that only a coward hides behind stone walls instead of facing his enemy with a blade in hand. The Usurper would agree. He is a strong man, brave … and rash enough to meet a Dothraki horde in the open field. But the men around him, well, their pipers play a different tune. His brother Stannis, Lord Tywin Lannister, Eddard Stark …” He spat.
乔拉爵士沉吟片刻。“劳勃应该生为多斯拉克人才对。”最后他开口说，“您的卡奥会告诉您，只有懦夫才会躲在城墙后，不敢与敌人当面对决，对这种说法，‘篡夺者’绝对会拍手赞成。他这个人骁勇善战……照他的个性，的确会冲动地在开阔地和多斯拉克大军决一死战。但他身边有很多人，哈，这些人就像伴奏的笛手，而他们决不会如此行事，比如他弟弟史坦尼斯·泰温兰尼斯特公爵，艾德·史塔克……”他啐了口唾沫。
“You hate this Lord Stark,” Dany said.
“你好像很讨厌这个史塔克公爵。”丹妮道。
“He took from me all I loved, for the sake of a few lice-ridden poachers and his precious honor,” Ser Jorah said bitterly. From his tone, she could tell the loss still pained him. He changed the subject quickly. “There,” he announced, pointing. “Vaes Dothrak. The city of the horselords.”
“他夺走了我深爱的一切，只为了区区几个偷猎人渣和他宝贵的荣誉。”乔拉爵士苦涩地说。从他的口气，丹妮听得出回忆依旧折磨着他。但他随即转变话题。“您看，”他指给她瞧，“这就是维斯多斯拉克，马王之城。”
Khal Drogo and his bloodriders led them through the great bazaar of the Western Market, down the broad ways beyond. Dany followed close on her silver, staring at the strangeness about her. Vaes Dothrak was at once the largest city and the smallest that she had ever known. She thought it must be ten times as large as Pentos, a vastness without walls or limits, its broad windswept streets paved in grass and mud and carpeted with wildflowers. In the Free Cities of the west, towers and manses and hovels and bridges and shops and halls all crowded in on one another, but Vaes Dothrak sprawled languorously, baking in the warm sun, ancient, arrogant, and empty.
卓戈卡奥和他的血盟卫领着大队人马穿过络绎熙攘的城西市集，沿着宽阔的大道行进。丹妮骑着银马，紧随在旁，睁大眼睛看着周遭的奇异风光。维斯多斯拉克既是她生平所见最大的城市，却也称得上最小的一座。依她判断，这座城占地面积大概有十个潘托斯那么大，既无城墙亦无边际，饱经风沙吹拂的宽广街道上铺着青草和泥土，野花则如地毯般覆盖其上。在西方的自由贸易城邦，塔楼、豪宅、房舍、桥梁、店铺和厅堂统统拥挤一块，而维斯多斯拉克却是慵懒地延展四方，沐浴在暖阳下，显得古老、傲慢而空虚。
Even the buildings were so queer to her eyes. She saw carved stone pavilions, manses of woven grass as large as castles, rickety wooden towers, stepped pyramids faced with marble, log halls open to the sky. In place of walls, some palaces were surrounded by thorny hedges. “None of them are alike,” she said.
就连各种建筑，在她眼里也显得古怪。她看到雕满花纹的石头营帐，如城堡般大的草织宅邸，摇摇欲坠的木造楼塔，大理石砌的阶状金字塔，以及屋顶开敞、直面天际的木材殿堂。有些宫殿更以荆棘篱笆来取代围墙。“它们长得通通都不一样。”她说。
“Your brother had part of the truth,” Ser Jorah admitted. “The Dothraki do not build. A thousand years ago, to make a house, they would dig a hole in the earth and cover it with a woven grass roof. The buildings you see were made by slaves brought here from lands they’ve plundered, and they built each after the fashion of their own peoples.”
“您哥哥说得倒也没错，”乔拉爵士坦承，“多斯拉克人的确不事建筑。一千年前，他们所谓的盖房子，便是在地上挖个大坑，然后铺上草织屋顶。您在这里看到的建筑，都是他们从别处掳来的奴隶盖的。不用说，那些奴隶自然是依照各地的风土民情去修筑了。”
Most of the halls, even the largest, seemed deserted. “Where are the people who live here?” Dany asked. The bazaar had been full of running children and men shouting, but elsewhere she had seen only a few eunuchs going about their business.
厅堂看起来大都荒废已久，即便最大的那几间也不例外。“住在这里的人都到哪儿去了？”丹妮问。市集里到处都是跑来跑去的小孩和高声吆喝的成年人，但在这里，她只看到几个办事的太监。
“Only the crones of the dosh khaleen dwell permanently in the sacred city, them and their slaves and servants,” Ser Jorah replied, “yet Vaes Dothrak is large enough to house every man of every khalasar , should all the khals return to the Mother at once. The crones have prophesied that one day that will come to pass, and so Vaes Dothrak must be ready to embrace all its children.”
“定居在圣城的，只有多希卡林的老妇，以及侍候她们的奴隶和仆人。”乔拉爵士回答，“然而维斯·多斯拉克占地广大，就算所有的卡奥都带着他们的卡拉萨回归圣母山，这里也容纳得下。女祭司曾经预言这样的一天终将来临，所以维斯·多斯拉克必须做好迎接所有孩子的准备。”
Khal Drogo finally called a halt near the Eastern Market where the caravans from Yi Ti and Asshai and the Shadow Lands came to trade, with the Mother of Mountains looming overhead. Dany smiled as she recalled Magister Illyrio’s slave girl and her talk of a palace with two hundred rooms and doors of solid silver. The “palace” was a cavernous wooden feasting hall, its rough-hewn timbered walls rising forty feet, its roof sewn silk, a vast billowing tent that could be raised to keep out the rare rains, or lowered to admit the endless sky. Around the hall were broad grassy horse yards fenced with high hedges, firepits, and hundreds of round earthen houses that bulged from the ground like miniature hills, covered with grass.
队伍接近城东市集时，卓戈卡奥总算下令停步。从夷地、亚夏、阴影之地及玉海沿岸来的商队，都在这里做买卖，巍峨的圣母山高耸于头顶。丹妮忆起伊利里欧总督的女奴曾说，卓戈的宫殿有两百个房间和银子打造的门扉，不禁莞尔一笑。这座“宫殿”乃是个深邃的木造饭厅，粗木建成的墙壁高达四十英尺，屋顶是一块丝织大帷幕，挂起可挡霎时风雨，收下能迎无尽长空。厅堂周围，高篱环绕，还有青草茂盛的宽阔马场，火堆，以及数以百计的圆顶土屋，它们自地面突起，杂草覆盖其上，远看仿如小丘。
A small army of slaves had gone ahead to prepare for Khal Drogo’s arrival. As each rider swung down from his saddle, he unbelted his arakh and handed it to a waiting slave, and any other weapons he carried as well. Even Khal Drogo himself was not exempt. Ser Jorah had explained that it was forbidden to carry a blade in Vaes Dothrak, or to shed a free man’s blood. Even warring khalasars put aside their feuds and shared meat and mead together when they were in sight of the Mother of Mountains. In this place, the crones of the dosh khaleen had decreed, all Dothraki were one blood, one khalasar , one herd.
为了迎接卓戈卡奥，大队奴隶已在前等候。每个人下马后，便解开腰际的亚拉克弯刀，以及随身携带的其他武器，交给旁边的奴隶，连卓戈卡奥也不例外。乔拉爵士事前曾解释道：在维斯·多斯拉克城里禁止携带武器，也不能伤害其他自由人。在圣母山的注视下，即便正在交战的卡拉萨，也会暂时捐弃成见，共饮蜜酒作乐。根据多希卡林女祭司的律令，在这个地方，所有的多斯拉克人都是血脉同源，属于同一个卡拉萨，同一个族群。
Cohollo came to Dany as Irri and Jhiqui were helping her down off her silver. He was the oldest of Drogo’s three bloodriders, a squat bald man with a crooked nose and a mouth full of broken teeth, shattered by a mace twenty years before when he saved the young khalakka from sellswords who hoped to sell him to his father’s enemies. His life had been bound to Drogo’s the day her lord husband was born.
伊丽和姬琪扶丹妮下马时，科霍罗过来找她。他是个矮胖的秃子，生了个鹰钩鼻，满嘴碎牙。二十年前，有人意图绑架卓戈，卖给他父亲的敌人，科霍罗从佣兵手中救出了当时还年轻的卡拉喀①，牙齿却因此被一个钉头锤打得稀烂。卓戈三个血盟卫中，数科霍罗最为年长。从她夫君诞生那天起，他的性命便与卓戈紧紧相连。
Every khal had his bloodriders. At first Dany had thought of them as a kind of Dothraki Kingsguard, sworn to protect their lord, but it went further than that. Jhiqui had taught her that a bloodrider was more than a guard; they were the khal’s brothers, his shadows, his fiercest friends. “Blood of my blood,” Drogo called them, and so it was; they shared a single life. The ancient traditions of the horselords demanded that when the khal died, his bloodriders died with him, to ride at his side in the night lands. If the khal died at the hands of some enemy, they lived only long enough to avenge him, and then followed him joyfully into the grave. In some khalasars , Jhiqui said, the bloodriders shared the khal’s wine, his tent, and even his wives, though never his horses. A man’s mount was his own.
每位卡奥都有自己的血盟卫。丹妮从前以为他们就是多斯拉克人中的御林铁卫，誓死保卫主人，但她随后发现不只这样。姬琪告诉她血盟卫不只是侍卫，他们更是卡奥的手足兄弟，他的影子，他最剽悍的朋友。卓戈与他们互以“吾血之血”相称，事实也的确如此，他们共享同一生命。依照马王的古老传统，卡奥若死，血盟卫亦需随行，以陪伴他走过夜晚的国度。若卡奥死于敌人之手，则他们需先为其复仇，然后欣喜地自杀殉葬。姬琪说，在某些卡拉萨里，血盟卫不仅同饮卡奥之酒，更居其营帐，甚至享其妻妾，惟有卡奥的马绝对不碰，因为每个人的坐骑只能属于个人。
Daenerys was glad that Khal Drogo did not hold to those ancient ways. She should not have liked being shared. And while old Cohollo treated her kindly enough, the others frightened her; Haggo, huge and silent, often glowered as if he had forgotten who she was, and Qotho had cruel eyes and quick hands that liked to hurt. He left bruises on Doreah’s soft white skin whenever he touched her, and sometimes made Irri sob in the night. Even his horses seemed to fear him.
丹妮莉丝很庆幸卓戈卡奥没有遵循这些古老习俗，她可不想被多人共享。老科霍罗待她还算亲切，其他人却让她害怕。哈戈身形巨大，沉默寡言，时常凶神恶煞地瞪着她，仿佛忘记了她的身份。柯索则眼神冷酷，双手灵活，性喜伤人。每回他碰过多莉亚，总会在她的白嫩肌肤上留下淤伤，有时还会让伊丽在夜里偷偷啜泣。连他的马儿好像也怕他。
Yet they were bound to Drogo for life and death, so Daenerys had no choice but to accept them. And sometimes she found herself wishing her father had been protected by such men. In the songs, the white knights of the Kingsguard were ever noble, valiant, and true, and yet King Aerys had been murdered by one of them, the handsome boy they now called the Kingslayer, and a second, Ser Barristan the Bold, had gone over to the Usurper. She wondered if all men were as false in the Seven Kingdoms. When her son sat the Iron Throne, she would see that he had bloodriders of his own to protect him against treachery in his Kingsguard.
但他们和卓戈生死与共，所以丹妮莉丝除了接纳他们，别无选择。有时候，她反倒希望自己父亲当年身边也有这种人保护。歌谣里的白衣白甲的御林铁卫，总是高贵、英勇而真诚，但伊里斯王却死在其中一人手里。如今人们称那个英俊的男孩为“弑君者”。至于“无畏的”巴利斯坦爵士，则投效篡夺者麾下。她不禁暗忖，七国的人是否都如此虚伪。待她的儿子坐上铁王座，她一定要让他也有自己的血盟卫，保护他免遭御林铁卫的诡计迫害。
“Khaleesi,” Cohollo said to her, in Dothraki. “Drogo, who is blood of my blood, commands me to tell you that he must ascend the Mother of Mountains this night, to sacrifice to the gods for his safe return.”
“卡丽熙，”科霍罗用多斯拉克语说，“吾血之血卓戈命令我通知您，今晚他必须登上圣母山，为他的平安归来向诸神献祭。”
Only men were allowed to set foot on the Mother, Dany knew. The khal’s bloodriders would go with him, and return at dawn. “Tell my sun-and-stars that I dream of him, and wait anxious for his return,” she replied, thankful. Dany tired more easily as the child grew within her; in truth, a night of rest would be most welcome. Her pregnancy only seemed to have inflamed Drogo’s desire for her, and of late his embraces left her exhausted.
丹妮知道惟有男人才能踏上圣母山，卡奥的血盟卫会和他同去，并在翌日清晨归返。“请告诉我的日和星，说我作梦都念着他，并且焦急地盼他回来。”她满怀感激地答道。事实上，随着胎儿日渐长大，丹妮越来越容易疲累，能休息一晚再好不过。她怀孕一事似乎益发点燃卓戈的欲火，近来他的临幸总让她筋疲力尽。
Doreah led her to the hollow hill that had been prepared for her and her khal . It was cool and dim within, like a tent made of earth. “Jhiqui, a bath, please,” she commanded, to wash the dust of travel from her skin and soak her weary bones. It was pleasant to know that they would linger here for a while, that she would not need to climb back on her silver on the morrow.
多莉亚领她走到为她和卡奥所准备的空心土丘。内里阴凉昏暗，如同一座泥土搭成的帐篷。“姬琪，请帮我准备沐浴。”她想洗去旅途风尘，好好浸一浸酸疼的骨头。她很高兴他们将在此停留一段时日，这样她就无需每天一大早便爬上小银马了。
The water was scalding hot, as she liked it. “I will give my brother his gifts tonight,” she decided as Jhiqui was washing her hair. “He should look a king in the sacred city. Doreah, run and find him and invite him to sup with me.” Viserys was nicer to the Lysene girl than to her Dothraki handmaids, perhaps because Magister Illyrio had let him bed her back in Pentos. “Irri, go to the bazaar and buy fruit and meat. Anything but horseflesh.”
热水极烫，正合她意。“今晚我要给哥哥张罗礼物。”姬琪为她洗头时，她下了决心。“在圣城里，他要有个国王的样子。多莉亚，快赶去找他，邀他与我共进晚餐。”相对她其他的多斯拉克女侍，韦赛里斯对这位里斯女孩比较好，这或许是因为以前在潘托斯时，伊利里欧总督曾让他睡过她。“伊丽，去市集买些水果和肉食，什么都好，就是不要马肉。”
“Horse is best,” Irri said. “Horse makes a man strong.”
“马肉是最好的肉，”伊丽道，“吃马肉让人强壮。”
“Viserys hates horsemeat.”
“韦赛里斯最恨马肉。”
“As you say, Khaleesi.”
“遵命，卡丽熙。”
She brought back a haunch of goat and a basket of fruits and vegetables. Jhiqui roasted the meat with sweetgrass and firepods, basting it with honey as it cooked, and there were melons and pomegranates and plums and some queer eastern fruit Dany did not know. While her handmaids prepared the meal, Dany laid out the clothing she’d had made to her brother’s measure: a tunic and leggings of crisp white linen, leather sandals that laced up to the knee, a bronze medallion belt, a leather vest painted with fire-breathing dragons. The Dothraki would respect him more if he looked less a beggar, she hoped, and perhaps he would forgive her for shaming him that day in the grass. He was still her king, after all, and her brother. They were both blood of the dragon.
她带了羊的腰骨肉和一篮蔬果回来。随后姬琪用甜菜和火豆烤肉，边烤边淋上蜂蜜。蔬果则有甜瓜、石榴和李子，还有些丹妮没见过的古怪东方瓜果。趁女仆准备晚餐，丹妮摆出了她照哥哥身材亲手裁制的衣服，包括白色亚麻布织成的外衣和护腿，绑到膝盖的凉鞋，一条青铜圆饰腰带，还有一件画了喷火龙的皮背心。如果他看起来不那么像乞丐，她希望多斯拉克人会比较尊重他，或许他也会原谅她那天在草海上羞辱他的事。再怎么说，他还是她的国王，也是她哥哥，他们同是真龙血脉。
She was arranging the last of his gifts—a sandsilk cloak, green as grass, with a pale grey border that would bring out the silver in his hair—when Viserys arrived, dragging Doreah by the arm. Her eye was red where he’d hit her. “How dare you send this whore to give me commands,” he said. He shoved the handmaid roughly to the carpet.
她正要摆上最后一件礼物——一件草绿色的纱丝披风，滚了浅灰边，恰好可以衬出他头发的银色——韦赛里斯气呼呼地进来了，他拽着多莉亚的手，只见她一只眼睛挨了揍，这会儿红肿起来。“你好大的胆子，竟敢叫这婊子来对我发号施令！”他边说边粗鲁地把女仆推倒在地毯上。
The anger took Dany utterly by surprise. “I only wanted … Doreah, what did you say?”
这突如其来的怒气大出丹妮意料。“我只不过想……多莉亚，你是怎么说的？”
“Khaleesi , pardons, forgive me. I went to him, as you bid, and told him you commanded him to join you for supper.”
“卡丽熙，对不起，请您原谅我。我照您吩咐去找他，告诉他说您命令他来一起吃饭。”
“No one commands the dragon,” Viserys snarled. “I am your king! I should have sent you back her head!”
“谁都不许对真龙发号施令，”韦赛里斯咆哮：“我是你的国王！我应该把她的头还给你才对！”
The Lysene girl quailed, but Dany calmed her with a touch. “Don’t be afraid, he won’t hurt you. Sweet brother, please, forgive her, the girl misspoke herself, I told her to ask you to sup with me, if it pleases Your Grace.” She took him by the hand and drew him across the room. “Look. These are for you.”
里斯女孩畏缩起来，丹妮用轻拍安抚她。“别怕，他不会伤害你。好哥哥，请您原谅她吧，她不过是说错话，我告诉她请您来和我共进晚餐，如果陛下您愿意的话。”她牵起他的手，拉他到房间的另一边。“您看，这些是我要送给你的。”
Viserys frowned suspiciously. “What is all this?”
韦赛里斯满腹狐疑地皱眉道：“这些是什么？”
“New raiment. I had it made for you.” Dany smiled shyly.
“新衣服。我特地为您做的。”丹妮害羞地微笑。
He looked at her and sneered. “Dothraki rags. Do you presume to dress me now?”
他斜眼看看她，轻蔑地说：“还不就是些多斯拉克破布。怎么，现在轮到你为我挑衣服啦？”
“Please … you’ll be cooler and more comfortable, and I thought … maybe if you dressed like them, the Dothraki …” Dany did not know how to say it without waking his dragon.
“请别这样……穿这些衣服会凉快点，也比较舒服，而且我想……我想如果您穿得跟他们，跟多斯拉克人一样……”丹妮不知要怎么说才不会唤醒睡龙之怒。
“Next you’ll want to braid my hair.”
“我看接下来你就会叫我跟着绑辫子了。”
“I’d never …” Why was he always so cruel? She had only wanted to help. “You have no right to a braid, you have won no victories yet.”
“我不会……”为什么他永远如此残酷？她只是想帮忙罢了。“其实您还没打过胜仗，也没有权利绑辫子。”
It was the wrong thing to say. Fury shone from his lilac eyes, yet he dared not strike her, not with her handmaids watching and the warriors of her khas outside. Viserys picked up the cloak and sniffed at it. “This stinks of manure. Perhaps I shall use it as a horse blanket.”
这是她最不该说的话。他淡紫色的眼睛里燃起怒火，却不敢打她，因为她的侍女站在旁边，而她卡斯的战士就在外面。韦赛里斯捡起披风嗅了嗅。“一股马粪味，我看给马用还差不多。”
“I had Doreah sew it specially for you,” she told him, wounded. “These are garments fit for a khal.”
“这是我让多莉亚特地为您缝的，”她很觉受伤地告诉他，“就算卡奥穿起来也很相称。”
“I am the Lord of the Seven Kingdoms, not some grass-stained savage with bells in his hair,” Viserys spat back at her. He grabbed her arm. “You forget yourself, slut. Do you think that big belly will protect you if you wake the dragon?”
“我是七国之君，不是什么浑身草臭、头发响叮当的野蛮人。”韦赛里斯斥道。他一把抓住她的手。“你越来越不识好歹了，小贱货。你以为自己现在肚子大了，唤醒睡龙之怒就没关系了吗？”
His fingers dug into her arm painfully and for an instant Dany felt like a child again, quailing in the face of his rage. She reached out with her other hand and grabbed the first thing she touched, the belt she’d hoped to give him, a heavy chain of ornate bronze medallions. She swung it with all her strength.
他的手指掐进她的臂膀，痛得她觉得自己仿佛又变成了小孩，见他生气就害怕得慌忙退缩。她伸出另一只手，摸索碰到的第一个东西，那恰好是她原本要给他的腰带，一条雕饰华丽的青铜牌链。她用尽浑身力气挥了出去。
It caught him full in the face. Viserys let go of her. Blood ran down his cheek where the edge of one of the medallions had sliced it open. “You are the one who forgets himself,” Dany said to him. “Didn’t you learn anything that day in the grass? Leave me now, before I summon my khas to drag you out. And pray that Khal Drogo does not hear of this, or he will cut open your belly and feed you your own entrails.”
腰带正中他面门。韦赛里斯应声松手，一块铜牌锐利的边缘割破了他的脸颊，鲜血顿时流淌下来。“不识好歹的人是你。”丹妮对他说，“那天在草原上，你还没得到教训吗？请你离开，免得我叫卡斯部众拖你走。你最好祈祷卓戈卡奥不要知道这件事，不然他会把你开膛破肚，挖出内脏叫你自己吃下去。”
Viserys scrambled back to his feet. “When I come into my kingdom, you will rue this day, slut.” He walked off, holding his torn face, leaving her gifts behind him.
韦赛里斯爬起来。“小贱货，等我回国以后，你一定会后悔的。”说完他托着受伤的脸走出去，礼物一件也没拿。
Drops of his blood had spattered the beautiful sandsilk cloak. Dany clutched the soft cloth to her cheek and sat cross-legged on her sleeping mats.
他滴下的血洒在那件美丽的纱丝披风上。丹妮握住柔软的布料，按在自己脸颊，然后盘腿坐进她的睡铺。
“Your supper is ready, Khaleesi,” Jhiqui announced.
“卡丽熙，您的晚餐准备好了。”姬琪宣布。
“I’m not hungry,” Dany said sadly. She was suddenly very tired. “Share the food among yourselves, and send some to Ser Jorah, if you would.” After a moment she added, “Please, bring me one of the dragon’s eggs.”
“我不饿。”丹妮悲伤地说。突然间她只觉得好累。“你们分着吃吧。麻烦送一点去给乔拉爵士。”过了半晌，她又加上一句，“请拿一颗龙蛋给我。”
Irri fetched the egg with the deep green shell, bronze flecks shining amid its scales as she turned it in her small hands. Dany curled up on her side, pulling the sandsilk cloak across her and cradling the egg in the hollow between her swollen belly and small, tender breasts. She liked to hold them. They were so beautiful, and sometimes just being close to them made her feel stronger, braver, as if somehow she were drawing strength from the stone dragons locked inside.
伊丽拿来那颗深绿色蛋壳的龙蛋。她放在小手心里反复把玩，鳞甲闪着青铜的光泽。丹妮翻身蜷曲，拉过纱丝披风做盖，把龙蛋放进她隆起的腹部和小而柔软的胸乳间的凹陷。她喜欢把玩这些龙蛋，它们实在漂亮，有时候光是靠近就会让她觉得自己变得强壮而勇敢，仿佛她从蛋里的石化龙那儿汲取了能量。
She was lying there, holding the egg, when she felt the child move within her … as if he were reaching out, brother to brother, blood to blood. “You are the dragon,” Dany whispered to him, “the true dragon. I know it. I know it.” And she smiled, and went to sleep dreaming of home.
就在她躺着玩弄龙蛋的时候，她感觉到体内婴儿的胎动……好像他正在向外伸手拥抱，同是手足兄弟，同是龙族血脉。“你才是真龙传人，”丹妮向他悄声说，“真正的龙。我知道的。”然后她微笑着入眠，梦见了家乡。
*BRAN
第三十八章 布兰
A light snow was falling. Bran could feel the flakes on his face, melting as they touched his skin like the gentlest of rains. He sat straight atop his horse, watching as the iron portcullis was winched upward. Try as he might to keep calm, his heart was fluttering in his chest.
天空下着细雪，布兰可以感觉到脸上飘落的雪花，一碰皮肤便即融化，像一阵轻柔的雨。他笔直地骑在马上，看着铁闸门被绞盘向上拉起。他虽竭力想保持镇定，心脏却一直在胸口狂跳个不停。
“Are you ready?” Robb asked.
“准备好了吗？”罗柏问。
Bran nodded, trying not to let his fear show. He had not been outside Winterfell since his fall, but he was determined to ride out as proud as any knight.
布兰点点头，试着不露出害怕的神色。虽然自坠楼以来，他便没有踏出过临冬城一步，但他打定主意要像个骑士一样昂首骑马出去。
“Let’s ride, then.” Robb put his heels into his big grey-and-white gelding, and the horse walked under the portcullis.
“那我们走吧。”罗柏一夹马肚，骑着他那匹灰白相间的大公马穿过闸门。
“Go,” Bran whispered to his own horse. He touched her neck lightly, and the small chestnut filly started forward. Bran had named her Dancer. She was two years old, and Joseth said she was smarter than any horse had a right to be. They had trained her special, to respond to rein and voice and touch. Up to now, Bran had only ridden her around the yard. At first Joseth or Hodor would lead her, while Bran sat strapped to her back in the oversize saddle the Imp had drawn up for him, but for the past fortnight he had been riding her on his own, trotting her round and round, and growing bolder with every circuit.
“前进。”布兰向自己的坐骑耳语。他轻触它的脖子，栗子色的小母马便迈步向前。布兰为它取名“小舞”。它今年两岁，乔赛斯说它聪明得不像马。他们已经对它进行过特别训练，让它对缰绳、声音和碰触有反应，但到目前为止，布兰只是骑它绕绕广场。最初乔赛斯或阿多会牵着它，布兰则被绑在它背上那个超大的马鞍上——马鞍是照小恶魔的设计图打造的。不过这两个星期以来，他已经能独自驾驭，骑着它来回慢跑，每绕一圈，胆子就更大。
They passed beneath the gatehouse, over the drawbridge, through the outer walls. Summer and Grey Wind came loping beside them, sniffing at the wind. Close behind came Theon Greyjoy, with his longbow and a quiver of broadheads; he had a mind to take a deer, he had told them. He was followed by four guardsmen in mailed shirts and coifs, and Joseth, a stick-thin stableman whom Robb had named master of horse while Hullen was away. Maester Luwin brought up the rear, riding on a donkey. Bran would have liked it better if he and Robb had gone off alone, just the two of them, but Hal Mollen would not hear of it, and Maester Luwin backed him. If Bran fell off his horse or injured himself, the maester was determined to be with him.
他们穿过城门楼，越过吊桥，走出外城墙。夏天和灰风跑在他们身畔，嗅着风中的气息。紧跟在后的是带着长弓和羽箭的席恩·葛雷乔伊。出发前他说过，今天定要猎头鹿回去。在他后面的是四个穿着锁子甲，戴着锁甲头套的卫士，以及骨瘦如柴的乔赛斯。胡伦离开之后，罗柏便指派乔赛斯担任新的马房总管。鲁温师傅骑着驴子殿后。布兰本来希望就他和罗柏两个人出去，但哈尔·莫兰不肯答应，鲁温师傅也持相同意见。为防布兰落马或负伤，师傅打定主意随侍在旁。
Beyond the castle lay the market square, its wooden stalls deserted now. They rode down the muddy streets of the village, past rows of small neat houses of log and undressed stone. Less than one in five were occupied, thin tendrils of woodsmoke curling up from their chimneys. The rest would fill up one by one as it grew colder. When the snow fell and the ice winds howled down out of the north, Old Nan said, farmers left their frozen fields and distant holdfasts, loaded up their wagons, and then the winter town came alive. Bran had never seen it happen, but Maester Luwin said the day was looming closer. The end of the long summer was near at hand. Winter is coming .
城堡外便是市集广场，只是如今木头搭建的摊位全部荒废。他们行经镇里的泥泞街道，穿过排列整齐，用木材和粗石建成的小屋。眼下只有不到五分之一的房屋有人迹，几缕细细的柴烟从烟囱升起。随着天气越趋寒冷，其余的空屋也会渐渐住满。老奶妈说，等到降雪时节来临，冰风从北吹来，农民们便会离开他们结冻的田地和遥远的村舍，把行李载上马车运到镇内居住，然后避冬市镇便会热闹起来。布兰从没见过这番景象，但鲁温师傅说那样的日子就快来了。因为长夏已尽，凛冬将至。
A few villagers eyed the direwolves anxiously as the riders went past, and one man dropped the wood he was carrying as he shrank away in fear, but most of the town-folk had grown used to the sight. They bent the knee when they saw the boys, and Robb greeted each of them with a lordly nod.
他们骑马经过时，有几个村民不安地看着冰原狼，还有一个人丢下抱着的木材，害怕得慌忙躲开，不过大多数村民早已习惯了这种情景。看到两个男孩，他们单膝跪下，而罗柏也颇有领主风范地——颔首致意。
With his legs unable to grip, the swaying motion of the horse made Bran feel unsteady at first, but the huge saddle with its thick horn and high back cradled him comfortingly, and the straps around his chest and thighs would not allow him to fall. After a time the rhythm began to feel almost natural. His anxiety faded, and a tremulous smile crept across his face.
因为双脚无法用力夹紧，骑马时的晃动起初使布兰觉得很不安稳，但大马鞍厚实高耸的靠背，却如摇篮一般舒服地搂着他，而绑住大腿和胸部的皮带也让他不致落马。经过一段时间，他渐渐习惯了摇晃的节奏，焦虑褪去，一抹害怕的微笑爬上了脸庞。
Two serving wenches stood beneath the sign of the Smoking Log, the local alehouse. When Theon Greyjoy called out to them, the younger girl turned red and covered her face. Theon spurred his mount to move up beside Robb. “Sweet Kyra,” he said with a laugh. “She squirms like a weasel in bed, but say a word to her on the street, and she blushes pink as a maid. Did I ever tell you about the night that she and Bessa—”
两个女侍站在烟柴酒馆的招牌下。当席恩·葛雷乔伊向她们打招呼时，比较年轻的那个女孩满面通红，用手遮脸。席恩踢马跑到罗柏旁边。“凯拉真可爱，”他笑道，“在床上她扭得像只黄鼠狼，可在街上跟她一句话还没说完，脸就红了，好像自己还是个黄花闺女似的。我有没有跟你说过那天晚上她和贝莎——”
“Not where my brother can hear, Theon,” Robb warned him with a glance at Bran.
“席恩，不要在我弟弟面前讲这种事。”罗柏告诫他，又瞄了布兰一眼。
Bran looked away and pretended not to have heard, but he could feel Greyjoy’s eyes on him. No doubt he was smiling. He smiled a lot, as if the world were a secret joke that only he was clever enough to understand. Robb seemed to admire Theon and enjoy his company, but Bran had never warmed to his father’s ward.
布兰望向别处，假装自己没听到，但他感觉得到葛雷乔伊的视线落在身上。可想而知，此刻的他一定正在微笑。他一天到晚微笑，仿佛整个世界就是个秘密的玩笑，而惟有聪明的他能理解。罗柏似乎对席恩颇为佩服，也很喜欢与他为伴，但布兰始终无法对父亲的养子产生感情。
Robb rode closer. “You are doing well, Bran.”
罗柏靠过来。“布兰，你骑得很好。”
“I want to go faster,” Bran replied.
“我想再骑快点。”布兰回答。
Robb smiled. “As you will.” He sent his gelding into a trot. The wolves raced after him. Bran snapped the reins sharply, and Dancer picked up her pace. He heard a shout from Theon Greyjoy, and the hoofbeats of the other horses behind him.
罗柏微笑，“没问题。”说完他策马开跑，狼群跟在他后面冲了出去。布兰用力一扯缰绳，小舞也加快步伐。他听见席恩·葛雷乔伊一声吆喝，以及身后杂沓的马蹄亩。
Bran’s cloak billowed out, rippling in the wind, and the snow seemed to rush at his face. Robb was well ahead, glancing back over his shoulder from time to time to make sure Bran and the others were following. He snapped the reins again. Smooth as silk, Dancer slid into a gallop. The distance closed. By the time he caught Robb on the edge of the wolfswood, two miles beyond the winter town, they had left the others well behind. “I can ride!” Bran shouted, grinning. It felt almost as good as flying.
布兰的披风在风中翻腾犹如波浪，落雪迎面扑来。罗柏遥遥领先，不时回头张望，确定布兰和其他人跟上。他再度扯缰，小舞如滑丝般流畅地迈步疾奔。两人的距离逐渐拉近，等他在避冬市镇两里外的狼林边缘追上罗柏时，他们已把其他人远远抛在后方。“我能骑马了！”布兰嘻嘻笑着大叫，这种感觉好像飞。
“I’d race you, but I fear you’d win.” Robb’s tone was light and joking, yet Bran could tell that something was troubling his brother underneath the smile.
“我很想跟你赛跑，怕只怕赢不了你。”罗柏的口气虽然轻快，带着戏谑的意味，但在哥哥的笑容背后，布兰却看得出他有心事。
“I don’t want to race.” Bran looked around for the direwolves. Both had vanished into the wood. “Did you hear Summer howling last night?”
“我不想跟你比赛。”布兰四处张望，寻找冰原狼的踪影。但那两只狼早就消失在了森林里。“昨晚你听见夏天叫了吗？”
“Grey Wind was restless too,” Robb said. His auburn hair had grown shaggy and unkempt, and a reddish stubble covered his jaw, making him look older than his fifteen years. “Sometimes I think they know things … sense things …” Robb sighed. “I never know how much to tell you, Bran. I wish you were older.”
“灰风也是焦躁不安。”罗柏道。他红棕色的头发长长了，未经梳理，有些凌乱，几撮红胡子遮住了下巴，让他看起来比十五岁的实际年龄要成熟。“有时候我觉得他们知道很多事……感应到很多事……”罗柏叹口气，“布兰，我不知该跟你说多少，我真希望你年纪再大一点。”
“I’m eight now!” Bran said. “Eight isn’t so much younger than fifteen, and I’m the heir to Winterfell, after you.”
“我已经八岁了！”布兰说：“八岁和十五岁没差多少，而且在你之后，我也是临冬城的继承人。”
“So you are.” Robb sounded sad, and even a little scared. “Bran, I need to tell you something. There was a bird last night. From King’s Landing. Maester Luwin woke me.”
“是啊，”罗柏语气哀伤，甚至有些害怕。“布兰，有件事我必须跟你讲清楚。昨晚来了只信鸦，从君临来，鲁温师傅半夜把我叫醒。”
Bran felt a sudden dread. Dark wings, dark words , Old Nan always said, and of late the messenger ravens had been proving the truth of the proverb. When Robb wrote to the Lord Commander of the Night’s Watch, the bird that came back brought word that Uncle Benjen was still missing. Then a message had arrived from the Eyrie, from Mother, but that had not been good news either. She did not say when she meant to return, only that she had taken the Imp as prisoner. Bran had sort of liked the little man, yet the name Lannister sent cold fingers creeping up his spine. There was something about the Lannisters, something he ought to remember, but when he tried to think what, he felt dizzy and his stomach clenched hard as a stone. Robb spent most of that day locked behind closed doors with Maester Luwin, Theon Greyjoy, and Hallis Mollen. Afterward, riders were sent out on fast horses, carrying Robb’s commands throughout the north. Bran heard talk of Moat Cailin, the ancient stronghold the First Men had built at the top of the Neck. No one ever told him what was happening, yet he knew it was not good.
布兰突然感到一阵惊恐。黑色的翅膀，黑色的消息，老奶妈总这么说，而近来传递信息的渡鸦一再证明了这句俗谚的正确。罗柏写信给守夜人军团的司令官，鸟儿却带回班扬叔叔依旧下落不明的消息。接着鹰巢城有信传来，是母亲写的，可惜也并非好消息。她没说何时回来，只说小恶魔如今是她的犯人。布兰其实还挺喜欢那矮个子，但“兰尼斯特”这个姓氏却教他背脊发凉。有件和兰尼斯特有关的事，他应该记得，然而每次他试图回忆，便觉头晕目眩，腹痛如绞。那一天，罗柏整日把自己关在房里，和鲁温师傅、席恩·葛雷乔伊，以及哈里斯·莫兰共商对策。之后信使骑着快马，将罗柏的命令传遍北境。布兰依稀听到卡林湾这地名，那是先民在颈泽北端筑起的古老要塞。究竟发生了什么，没人告诉他，但肯定不是什么好事。
And now another raven, another message. Bran clung to hope. “Was the bird from Mother? Is she coming home?”
这会儿竟又来了一只渡鸦，又带来新的消息。布兰强迫自己满怀希望。“是母亲送来的吗？她是不是要回家了？”
“The message was from Alyn in King’s Landing. Jory Cassel is dead. And Wyl and Heward as well. Murdered by the Kingslayer.” Robb lifted his face to the snow, and the flakes melted on his cheeks. “May the gods give them rest.”
“信是埃林从君临写来的。乔里·凯索死了，还有韦尔和海华。他们惨死于弑君者之手。”罗柏仰头面对飘雪，雪片融化在他两颊。“愿天上诸神让他们安息。”
Bran did not know what to say. He felt as if he’d been punched. Jory had been captain of the household guard at Winterfell since before Bran was born. “They killed Jory?” He remembered all the times Jory had chased him over the roofs. He could picture him striding across the yard in mail and plate, or sitting at his accustomed place on the bench in the Great Hall, joking as he ate. “Why would anyone kill Jory?”
布兰不知该说什么才好，只觉自己仿佛被狠揍了一拳。打布兰出生，乔里就是临冬城的侍卫队长。“他们杀了乔里？”他记得每一次乔里追着他在屋顶上奔跑的情景，他可以清楚地拼凑出他全副铠甲，大步走过广场的风光，或是坐在厅堂的老位子上，边吃边谈笑的模样。“为什么会有人要杀乔里？”
Robb shook his head numbly, the pain plain in his eyes. “I don’t know, and … Bran, that’s not the worst of it. Father was caught beneath a falling horse in the fight. Alyn says his leg was shattered, and … Maester Pycelle has given him the milk of the poppy, but they aren’t sure when … when he …” The sound of hoofbeats made him glance down the road, to where Theon and the others were coming up. “When he will wake,” Robb finished. He laid his hand on the pommel of his sword then, and went on in the solemn voice of Robb the Lord. “Bran, I promise you, whatever might happen, I will not let this be forgotten.”
罗柏木然地摇头，眼里溢满悲痛。“我不知道。还有……布兰，这不是最糟的消息，父亲也在打斗中被摔倒的马压住，埃林说他的腿碎了……派席尔大学士已经给他喝了罂粟花奶，但他们不确定什么时候……什么时候他才……”听见身后的蹄声，他转头朝来路望去，席恩等人已经赶了上来。“他才会醒来。”罗柏把话说完，伸手按住剑柄，恢复了罗柏城主的庄严声调，“布兰，我向你保证，不管发生什么，这个仇我永不会忘。”
Something in his tone made Bran even more fearful. “What will you do?” he asked as Theon Greyjoy reined in beside them.
他的语气却更教布兰害怕。“那你打算怎么办？”他问。席恩·葛雷乔伊拉住缰绳，停在他们旁边。
“Theon thinks I should call the banners,” Robb said.
“席恩认为我应该立刻召集封臣。”罗柏说。
“Blood for blood.” For once Greyjoy did not smile. His lean, dark face had a hungry look to it, and black hair fell down across his eyes.
“血债血还。”这次葛雷乔伊没有笑。他那张削瘦而黝黑的脸，有种饥渴的神色，黑发垂下，遮住双眼。
“Only the lord can call the banners,” Bran said as the snow drifted down around them.
“惟有领主才能召集封臣。”布兰说，雪持续飘落在他们周围。
“If your father dies,” Theon said, “Robb will be Lord of Winterfell.”
“如果令尊去世，”席恩道，“罗柏就是临冬城公爵。”
“He won’t die!” Bran screamed at him.
“他不会死！”布兰朝他尖叫。
Robb took his hand. “He won’t die, not Father,” he said calmly. “Still … the honor of the north is in my hands now. When our lord father took his leave of us, he told me to be strong for you and for Rickon. I’m almost a man grown, Bran.”
罗柏握住他的手。“他不会死，父亲大人不会死。”他平静地说。“可是……如今北境的荣誉系于我手。父亲大人临行前曾对我说，为了你和瑞肯，我一定要坚强。布兰，我几乎是成年人了。”
Bran shivered. “I wish Mother was back,” he said miserably. He looked around for Maester Luwin; his donkey was visible in the far distance, trotting over a rise. “Does Maester Luwin say to call the banners too?”
布兰颤抖不已。“母亲如果在就好了。”他可怜兮兮地说。他转头寻找鲁温师傅的身影，他的驴子在远处依稀可见，此刻正小跑步爬上缓丘。“鲁温师傅也认为应该征召诸侯吗？”
“The maester is timid as an old woman,” said Theon.
“师傅他和老女人一样，胆小着呢。”席恩道。
“Father always listened to his counsel,” Bran reminded his brother. “Mother too.”
“但父亲向来听从他的忠告，”布兰提醒哥哥，“母亲也是。”
“I listen to him,” Robb insisted. “I listen to everyone.”
“我也听，”罗柏坚持，“每个人的意见我都听。”
The joy Bran had felt at the ride was gone, melted away like the snowflakes on his face. Not so long ago, the thought of Robb calling the banners and riding off to war would have filled him with excitement, but now he felt only dread. “Can we go back now?” he asked. “I’m cold.”
布兰外出骑马的喜悦，此刻已经消失得无影无踪，像脸上的雪片般融化殆尽。若是从前，听到罗柏要召集封臣，率军出征，他一定会兴奋难耐，然而现在他感到的却只有恐惧。“我们可以回去了吗？”他问，“我觉得好冷。”
Robb glanced around. “We need to find the wolves. Can you stand to go a bit longer?”
罗柏环顾四周。“得先把狼找到。你能再忍耐一会儿吗？”
“I can go as long as you can.” Maester Luwin had warned him to keep the ride short, for fear of saddle sores, but Bran would not admit to weakness in front of his brother. He was sick of the way everyone was always fussing over him and asking how he was.
“你能骑多久，我就能骑多久。”鲁温师傅曾警告他骑马时间不要太长，惟恐他在马鞍上坐久了全身会酸痛，但布兰不愿在哥哥面前自承虚弱。他受够了大家成天大惊小怪，对他的身体问长问短。
“Let’s hunt down the hunters, then,” Robb said. Side by side, they urged their mounts off the kingsroad and struck out into the wolfswood. Theon dropped back and followed well behind them, talking and joking with the guardsmen.
“那我们这就去把小猎人给猎回来吧。”罗柏说。于是他们并肩而行，驱策坐骑离开国王大道，进入狼林。席恩远远落在后面，和其他卫士谈笑。
It was nice under the trees. Bran kept Dancer to a walk, holding the reins lightly and looking all around him as they went. He knew this wood, but he had been so long confined to Winterfell that he felt as though he were seeing it for the first time. The smells filled his nostrils; the sharp fresh tang of pine needles, the earthy odor of wet rotting leaves, the hints of animal musk and distant cooking fires. He caught a glimpse of a black squirrel moving through the snow-covered branches of an oak, and paused to study the silvery web of an empress spider.
置身林问的感觉真好。布兰轻握马缰，让小舞缓步慢行，一边四处观望。他很熟悉这座森林，然而在长期坐困临冬城后，如今却有初次造访的兴味。树林里的气息充溢他的鼻孔：新鲜松针的明锐香气，湿软腐叶的泥土芬芳，还有模糊的动物麝香，以及远方炊烟的味道。他瞥见一只黑松鼠的身影，在一棵被雪覆盖的橡树枝干间穿梭，接着又驻足欣赏女王蛛所织就的银色蛛网。
Theon and the others fell farther and farther behind, until Bran could no longer hear their voices. From ahead came the faint sound of rushing waters. It grew louder until they reached the stream. Tears stung his eyes.
席恩和其他人离他们越来越远，到后来布兰已听不见他们的声音。前方传来模糊的流水声。水声渐大，直到他们抵达溪边。这时，泪水刺痛了他的眼。
“Bran?” Robb asked. “What’s wrong?”
“布兰？”罗柏问，“你怎么了？”
Bran shook his head. “I was just remembering,” he said. “Jory brought us here once, to fish for trout. You and me and Jon. Do you remember?”
布兰摇摇头。“我只是想起从前的事。”他说，“有一次乔里带我们来这儿抓鳟鱼。就你、我还有琼恩，记得吗？”
“I remember,” Robb said, his voice quiet and sad.
“我记得。”罗柏说，他的语调平静而哀伤。
“I didn’t catch anything,” Bran said, “but Jon gave me his fish on the way back to Winterfell. Will we ever see Jon again?”
“结果我什么也没抓到，”布兰说，“可在回临冬城的路上，琼恩却把他抓的鱼都给了我。我们还能再见到琼恩吗？”
“We saw Uncle Benjen when the king came to visit,” Robb pointed out. “Jon will visit too, you’ll see.”
“上次国王来访，我们不就看到了班扬叔叔？”罗柏告诉他，“琼恩也会回来作客，你等着瞧吧。”
The stream was running high and fast. Robb dismounted and led his gelding across the ford. In the deepest part of the crossing, the water came up to midthigh. He tied his horse to a tree on the far side, and waded back across for Bran and Dancer. The current foamed around rock and root, and Bran could feel the spray on his face as Robb led him over. It made him smile. For a moment he felt strong again, and whole. He looked up at the trees and dreamed of climbing them, right up to the very top, with the whole forest spread out beneath him.
溪流湍急，水势高涨。罗柏下马，牵着坐骑越过浅滩。渡口最深处，水及大腿。他把马儿拴在对岸的一棵树上，然后涉水回来带布兰和小舞过去。溪流拍打着岩石和树根，激起阵阵飞沫，罗柏当先领他渡河，布兰可以感觉水花溅到脸上。他笑了。一时之间，他觉得自己又是身强体壮，四肢健全。他仰望树林，梦想自己能爬上去，攀上树顶，让整片树海尽展眼前。
They were on the far side when they heard the howl, a long rising wail that moved through the trees like a cold wind. Bran raised his head to listen. “Summer,” he said. No sooner had he spoken than a second voice joined the first.
他们抵达对岸时，只听树林里传来一声长嚎，音调渐高，哀叹久长，仿如穿梭林间的一阵冷风。布兰抬首聆听。“那是夏天。”他说。话音刚落，第二阵嚎声便加入进来。
“They’ve made a kill,” Robb said as he remounted, “I’d best go and bring them back. Wait here, Theon and the others should be along shortly.”
“他们杀死猎物了。”罗柏边说边骑上马。“我看我最好去带他们回来。你在这里等，席恩他们应该马上就到。”
“I want to go with you,” Bran said.
“我想跟你一起去。”布兰说。
“I’ll find them faster by myself.” Robb spurred his gelding and vanished into the trees.
“我自己去比较快。”罗柏一踢马刺，消失在树林里。
Once he was gone, the woods seemed to close in around Bran. The snow was falling more heavily now. Where it touched the ground it melted, but all about him rock and root and branch wore a thin blanket of white. As he waited, he was conscious of how uncomfortable he felt. He could not feel his legs, hanging useless in the stirrups, but the strap around his chest was tight and chafing, and the melting snow had soaked through his gloves to chill his hands. He wondered what was keeping Theon and Maester Luwin and Joseth and the rest.
他走后，整个森林仿佛朝布兰包围过来。雪下得更大，虽然一碰地面就会融化，但他周遭的岩石、树根和枝干却都覆上了一层薄薄的白。他等待之时，方才察觉到自己有多不舒服：双腿没有知觉，毫无用处地挂在马镫上；胸膛的皮带绑得很紧，擦伤了皮肤；雪水融化渗进手套，冻得他两手发麻。他不禁奇怪席恩、鲁温师傅，以及乔赛斯等人怎么还没来。
When he heard the rustle of leaves, Bran used the reins to make Dancer turn, expecting to see his friends, but the ragged men who stepped out onto the bank of the stream were strangers.
随后他听见树叶沙沙作响，布兰立刻拉动缰绳，教小舞转身，迎向他的朋友们。然而从林中走到溪边的，却是一群衣着破烂的陌生人。（文＇心＇手＇打＇组＇手＇打＇整＇理）
“Good day to you,” he said nervously. One look, and Bran knew they were neither foresters nor farmers. He was suddenly conscious of how richly he was dressed. His surcoat was new, dark grey wool with silver buttons, and a heavy silver pin fastened his fur-trimmed cloak at the shoulders. His boots and gloves were lined with fur as well.
“你们好。”他紧张地说。只需一眼，布兰便知他们既非林务官，亦非农民。他猛然惊觉自己衣着华丽，身上穿着崭新的深灰色羊毛外套，缝了银扣，绒毛边的披风用一个沉甸甸的银别针系在肩头。他的皮靴和手套也都滚了绒毛边。
“All alone, are you?” said the biggest of them, a bald man with a raw windburnt face. “Lost in the wolfswood, poor lad.”
“你，就一个人啊？”其中个子最大，满脸风霜痕迹的光头男子说，“可怜的小鬼，在狼林里迷了路。”
“I’m not lost.” Bran did not like the way the strangers were looking at him. He counted four, but when he turned his head, he saw two others behind him. “My brother rode off just a moment ago, and my guard will be here shortly.”
“我没有迷路。”布兰不喜欢这群陌生人盯着他瞧的模样。对方一共四人，他一转头看到背后还有两个。“我哥哥刚走，我的卫兵马上就来。”
“Your guard, is it?” a second man said. Grey stubble covered his gaunt face. “And what would they be guarding, my little lord? Is that a silver pin I see there on your cloak?”
“你的卫兵，啊哈？”另一个面容憔悴，一脸灰胡碴的人说，“小少爷，我倒问问你，他们要守卫什么啊？守卫你披风上那个银别针吗？”
“Pretty,” said a woman’s voice. She scarcely looked like a woman; tall and lean, with the same hard face as the others, her hair hidden beneath a bowl-shaped halfhelm. The spear she held was eight feet of black oak, tipped in rusted steel.
“真是个漂亮东西。”这次是女人的声音。她看起来委实不太像女人；又高又瘦，和其他人同样的苦脸，头发则埋藏在碗状的半罩头盔下。她手中的长矛是根八尺长的黑橡木棍，前面安着锈掉的枪尖。
“Let’s have a look,” said the big bald man.
“给咱们瞧瞧。”光头大汉说。
Bran watched him anxiously. The man’s clothes were filthy, fallen almost to pieces, patched here with brown and here with blue and there with a dark green, and faded everywhere to grey, but once that cloak might have been black. The grey stubbly man wore black rags too, he saw with a sudden start. Suddenly Bran remembered the oathbreaker his father had beheaded, the day they had found the wolf pups; that man had worn black as well, and Father said he had been a deserter from the Night’s Watch. No man is more dangerous , he remembered Lord Eddard saying. The deserter knows his life is forfeit if he is taken, so he will not flinch from any crime, no matter how vile or cruel .
布兰不安地看着他。这人的衣服肮脏污秽、破烂不堪，东一块棕，西一块蓝，还有一块暗绿补丁，其余的地方则通通褪成灰色，但看得出原本是件黑斗篷。他突然发现，那个一脸灰胡碴的人也穿着黑色破衣。布兰蓦地想起他们找到小狼当天，被父亲砍头的那个背弃誓言的人，衣着也是黑色，而父亲说他是守夜人部队的逃兵。世间最危险的人莫过于此，他想起艾德公爵的话，因为他们自知一旦被捕，只有死路一条，于是恶向胆边生，再伤天害理的勾当也干得出来。
“The pin, lad,” the big man said. He held out his hand.
“小鬼，把别针拿来。”大汉伸出手说。
“We’ll take the horse too,” said another of them, a woman shorter than Robb, with a broad flat face and lank yellow hair. “Get down, and be quick about it.” A knife slid from her sleeve into her hand, its edge jagged as a saw.
“还有你的马，”另一个女人说，她的个子比罗柏矮，生了一张扁扁的宽脸和一头黄色直发。“快给我下来。”一把锋呈锯齿的匕首从她袖里闪进手中。
“No,” Bran blurted. “I can’t …”
“可是，”布兰脱口而出，“我没办法……”
The big man grabbed his reins before Bran could think to wheel Dancer around and gallop off. “You can, lordling … and will, if you know what’s good for you.”
布兰还没想到调转小舞开步逃走，大汉便一把抓住了缰绳。“小少爷，你当然有办法……而且一定得想办法，如果你不想吃苦头的话。”
“Stiv, look how he’s strapped on.” The tall woman pointed with her spear. “Might be it’s the truth he’s telling.”
“史帝夫，你瞧，他被绑在马鞍上，”高个女人用长枪指着说，“或许他说的是实话。”
“Straps, is it?” Stiv said. He drew a dagger from a sheath at his belt. “There’s ways to deal with straps.”
“绑起来了，是吗？”史帝夫说。他从腰间的刀鞘里抽出匕首。“这不成问题。”
“You some kind of cripple?” asked the short woman.
“你残废了还是怎么了？”矮个女人问。
Bran flared. “I’m Brandon Stark of Winterfell, and you better let go of my horse, or I’ll see you all dead.”
布兰怒道：“我是临冬城的布兰登·史塔克，你最好放开我的马，否则我教你们通通没命。”
The gaunt man with the grey stubbled face laughed. “The boy’s a Stark, true enough. Only a Stark would be fool enough to threaten where smarter men would beg.”
一脸灰胡碴的瘦子哈哈大笑。“我看这小子准是史塔克家的人没错，只有史塔克家的人才这么笨，该讨饶的时候还要狠。”
“Cut his little cock off and stuff it in his mouth,” suggested the short woman. “That should shut him up.”
“把他小鸡鸡割下来塞他嘴里，”矮个女人提议，“这样他肯定闭嘴。”
“You’re as stupid as you are ugly, Hali,” said the tall woman. “The boy’s worth nothing dead, but alive … gods be damned, think what Mance would give to have Benjen Stark’s own blood to hostage!”
“哈莉，你已经够丑了，没想到还这么没脑子。”高个女人道，“这孩子死了就不值钱啦，可要留着活口……天杀的，想想曼斯手上若有了班扬·史塔克的亲属当人质，他会怎么赏我们！”
“Mance be damned,” the big man cursed. “You want to go back there, Osha? More fool you. Think the white walkers will care if you have a hostage?” He turned back to Bran and slashed at the strap around his thigh. The leather parted with a sigh.
“曼斯见鬼去，”大汉咒道，“你还想回去，欧莎？我看你才没脑子。你以为白鬼会管你手上有没有人质？”他转向布兰，割开他大腿的皮带。皮革仿佛松了口气似地分开。
The stroke had been quick and careless, biting deep. Looking down, Bran glimpsed pale flesh where the wool of his leggings had parted. Then the blood began to flow. He watched the red stain spread, feeling light-headed, curiously apart; there had been no pain, not even a hint of feeling. The big man grunted in surprise.
他出手很快，又没有留心，结果割得很深。布兰低头，看到羊毛绑腿被割开的地方，露出白皙的大腿肉。接着血涌出来，他望着红色的血渍逐渐扩散，感觉轻微头晕，却意外地疏离，丝毫不觉疼痛，连一点感觉都没有。大汉惊讶地哼了一声。
“Put down your steel now, and I promise you shall have a quick and painless death,” Robb called out.
“立刻放下武器，我保证让你们死得干脆。”罗柏叫道。
Bran looked up in desperate hope, and there he was. The strength of the words were undercut by the way his voice cracked with strain. He was mounted, the bloody carcass of an elk slung across the back of his horse, his sword in a gloved hand.
布兰怀着最后一丝希望抬起头，他果真出现在那里。可惜他那番话的威严，却被紧张嘶哑的声调所减低。他骑着马，麇鹿血淋淋的尸体挂在马背，手握长剑。
“The brother,” said the man with the grey stubbly face.
“老哥回来了。”灰胡碴的男子道。
“He’s a fierce one, he is,” mocked the short woman. Hali, they called her. “You mean to fight us, boy?”
“哟，这家伙挺凶悍嘛。”矮个女人讥讽他。他们叫她哈莉。“你想跟咱们打，小鬼头？”
“Don’t be a fool, lad. You’re one against six.” The tall woman, Osha, leveled her spear. “Off the horse, and throw down the sword. We’ll thank you kindly for the mount and for the venison, and you and your brother can be on your way.”
“小子，你这是以一对六，别傻了。”高个的欧莎平举长枪。“赶快下马，把剑扔了。我们会谢谢你的马儿和鹿肉，然后放你和你弟弟走路。”
Robb whistled. They heard the faint sound of soft feet on wet leaves. The undergrowth parted, low-hanging branches giving up their accumulation of snow, and Grey Wind and Summer emerged from the green. Summer sniffed the air and growled.
罗柏吹声口哨。众人听见脚步轻踩湿叶的声响。矮树丛低垂的枝桠洒下覆盖的雪，向两旁分开，灰风和夏天自一片绿色中穿出。夏天嗅嗅风中的气息，出声低吼。
“Wolves,” gasped Hali.
“狼来了。”哈莉噤声道。
“Direwolves,” Bran said. Still half-grown, they were as large as any wolf he had ever seen, but the differences were easy to spot, if you knew what to look for. Maester Luwin and Farlen the kennelmaster had taught him. A direwolf had a bigger head and longer legs in proportion to its body, and its snout and jaw were markedly leaner and more pronounced. There was something gaunt and terrible about them as they stood there amid the gently falling snow. Fresh blood spotted Grey Wind’s muzzle.
“是冰原狼。”布兰说。虽然并未发育完全，他们的体格也只有一般狼大小，但若仔细观察，很容易分辨出差异所在。鲁温师傅和驯兽长法兰教过他：冰原狼的头比较大，四肢较长，鼻子和下巴则特别尖细、形状明显。站在轻飘的细雪里，他们怀着憔悴而骇人的神态。灰风的口鼻沾满鲜血。
“Dogs,” the big bald man said contemptuously. “Yet I’m told there’s nothing like a wolfskin cloak to warm a man by night.” He made a sharp gesture. “Take them.”
“两只臭狗。”光头男子轻蔑地说，“我倒是知道，夜里没什么比狼皮斗篷更保暖。”他猛地做了个手势。“拿下！”
Robb shouted, “Winterfell!” and kicked his horse. The gelding plunged down the bank as the ragged men closed. A man with an axe rushed in, shouting and heedless. Robb’s sword caught him full in the face with a sickening crunch and a spray of bright blood. The man with the gaunt stubbly face made a grab for the reins, and for half a second he had them … and then Grey Wind was on him, bearing him down. He fell back into the stream with a splash and a shout, flailing wildly with his knife as his head went under. The direwolf plunged in after him, and the white water turned red where they had vanished.
罗柏高喊：“临名冬城万岁！”然后踢马向前。公马跳进溪里，衣衫褴褛的敌人围了过去。有个人拿着斧头，没头没脑地大叫着朝他冲来。罗柏的长剑正中对方面门，发出令人作呕的碎裂声，随即鲜血四溅。一脸胡碴的人伸手去扯缰绳，才抓住半秒……只见灰风一跃而起把他扑倒。他噗通一声跌进溪里，呐喊着，疯狂地挥舞着短刀，头部被水淹没。冰原狼跳上去继续攻击，两人消失在水中，转眼之间，白色的河水便转为殷红。
Robb and Osha matched blows in midstream. Her long spear was a steel-headed serpent, flashing out at his chest, once, twice, three times, but Robb parried every thrust with his longsword, turning the point aside. On the fourth or fifth thrust, the tall woman overextended herself and lost her balance, just for a second. Robb charged, riding her down.
罗柏和欧莎在河中央打得不可开交。她的长枪活像条钢头毒蛇，闪电般朝他胸口窜去，一次、两次、三次，但罗柏的长剑挡下每一记攻势，拨开刺来的枪尖。在她第四还是第五次突刺时，高个女人用力过猛，失了重心，仅一秒的时间，罗柏便骑马冲锋，把她踩在蹄下。
A few feet away, Summer darted in and snapped at Hali. The knife bit at his flank. Summer slid away, snarling, and came rushing in again. This time his jaws closed around her calf. Holding the knife with both hands, the small woman stabbed down, but the direwolf seemed to sense the blade coming. He pulled free for an instant, his mouth full of leather and cloth and bloody flesh. When Hali stumbled and fell, he came at her again, slamming her backward, teeth tearing at her belly.
几尺外，夏天向前疾跳，扑咬哈莉，结果后背反挨一记短刀。夏天咆哮着后退，再度冲刺。这回他的利齿紧紧咬住她的小腿。矮个女人两手握刀，死命向下插去，然而冰原狼仿佛能感应危险，迅速松开抽身，撕下满嘴皮革、碎布和血淋淋的肉块。哈莉跌倒在地，他又扑跳上前，把她向后撞开，撕咬她的小腹。
The sixth man ran from the carnage … but not far. As he went scrambling up the far side of the bank, Grey Wind emerged from the stream, dripping wet. He shook the water off and bounded after the running man, hamstringing him with a single snap of his teeth, and going for the throat as the screaming man slid back down toward the water.
第五个人想逃离这场屠杀……可惜却没跑远。他正踉跄着爬上对岸，灰风浑身湿淋淋地从河里冒出，甩甩身上的水，箭步追去。冰原狼嘴巴一张一阖，咬断他的腿筋，接着去咬他的喉咙，那人惨叫着滑进河里。
And then there was no one left but the big man, Stiv. He slashed at Bran’s chest strap, grabbed his arm, and yanked. Suddenly Bran was falling. He sprawled on the ground, his legs tangled under him, one foot in the stream. He could not feel the cold of the water, but he felt the steel when Stiv pressed his dagger to his throat. “Back away,” the man warned, “or I’ll open the boy’s windpipe, I swear it.”
此时只剩那个大汉史帝夫了。他割开布兰胸前的皮带，抓住他的臂膀用力一扯，布兰便从马背上摔下来。他瘫在地上，双腿纠缠一团，被身体压住，一只脚还滑进了溪里。他感觉不到冰冷的河水，却感觉得出史帝夫按在他喉咙的匕首。“退后，”他警告道，“不然我发誓会把这小鬼的气管给割了。”
Robb reined his horse in, breathing hard. The fury went out of his eyes, and his sword arm dropped.
罗柏勒住马，急剧地喘气。怒意从他眼底消失，持剑的手也垂软下来。
In that moment Bran saw everything. Summer was savaging Hali, pulling glistening blue snakes from her belly. Her eyes were wide and staring. Bran could not tell whether she was alive or dead. The grey stubbly man and the one with the axe lay unmoving, but Osha was on her knees, crawling toward her fallen spear. Grey Wind padded toward her, dripping wet. “Call him off!” the big man shouted. “Call them both off, or the cripple boy dies now!”
就在那一刹那，整个局势在布兰眼前一览无遗。夏天正对付哈莉，从她肚子里扯出一条条发亮的蓝色小蛇。她的眼睛睁得老大，瞪着冰原狼。布兰辨不清她究竟是死是活。灰胡碴和拿斧头那两个人躺着一动不动。欧莎则爬了起来，正朝她的长枪挪去。灰风浑身滴水，啪哒啪哒朝她走近。“叫他走开！”大汉喊道，“把他们都叫开，不然这残废小鬼现在就死！”
“Grey Wind, Summer, to me,” Robb said.
“灰风，夏天，过来。”罗柏道。
The direwolves stopped, turned their heads. Grey Wind loped back to Robb. Summer stayed where he was, his eyes on Bran and the man beside him. He growled. His muzzle was wet and red, but his eyes burned.
冰原狼停步，回头。灰风飞奔到罗柏身边，夏天则留在原地，看着布兰和他身旁的人，发出低吼。它的口鼻鲜血淋漓，双眼燃烧着怒火。
Osha used the butt end of her spear to lever herself back to her feet. Blood leaked from a wound on the upper arm where Robb had cut her. Bran could see sweat trickling down the big man’s face. Stiv was as scared as he was, he realized. “Starks,” the man muttered, “bloody Starks.” He raised his voice. “Osha, kill the wolves and get his sword.”
欧莎撑着枪尾站起来。她的上臂被罗柏砍了一剑，汨汨流血。布兰看到大汉满脸是汗，这才明白史帝夫和自己同样害怕。“史塔克，”他喃喃道，“该死的史塔克。”他提高音量。“欧莎，把狼宰了，拿走他的剑。”
“Kill them yourself,” she replied. “I’ll not be getting near those monsters.”
“要杀你自己杀，”她回答，“我死也不靠近那些怪物。”
For a moment Stiv was at a loss. His hand trembled; Bran felt a trickle of blood where the knife pressed against his neck. The stench of the man filled his nose; he smelled of fear. “You,” he called out to Robb. “You have a name?”
史帝夫似乎突然间没了主意。他的手开始发抖，布兰只觉得刀锋紧贴脖子，血顺着滴下来。男人的臭味充塞他鼻孔，那是一种恐俱的气息。“喂，”他朝罗柏喊，“你叫啥名字？”
“I am Robb Stark, the heir to Winterfell.”
“我是罗柏·史塔克，临冬城的继承人。”
“This is your brother?”
“这是你弟？”
“Yes.”
“对。”
“You want him alive, you do what I say. Off the horse.”
“如果你要他活命，就照我的话办。下马。”
Robb hesitated a moment. Then, slowly and deliberately, he dismounted and stood with his sword in hand.
罗柏迟疑片刻，接着便刻意缓慢下马，持剑站立。
“Now kill the wolves.”
“现在把狼宰了。”
Robb did not move.
罗柏没动。
“You do it. The wolves or the boy.”
“快杀，不然这小鬼就没命。”
“No!” Bran screamed. If Robb did as they asked, Stiv would kill them both anyway, once the direwolves were dead.
“不要！”布兰尖叫。就算罗柏照办，等冰原狼一死，史帝夫也不会放过他们俩。
The bald man took hold of his hair with his free hand and twisted it cruelly, till Bran sobbed in pain. “You shut your mouth, cripple, you hear me?” He twisted harder. “You hear me?”
光头用另一只手抓住他的头发，使劲狠狠地一扭，直到布兰痛得失声啜泣。“小废物，你给我闭嘴，听到了没？”他更用力地拧。“你听到了没？”
A low thrum came from the woods behind them. Stiv gave a choked gasp as a half foot of razor-tipped broadhead suddenly exploded out of his chest. The arrow was bright red, as if it had been painted in blood.
飕的一声，从背后的树林传来。史帝夫声音一紧，喘不过气来。只见一个半尺长，利如剃刀的宽大箭头突然自他胸膛爆出。那枝箭整个成了鲜红，沐浴在血中。
The dagger fell away from Bran’s throat. The big man swayed and collapsed, facedown in the stream. The arrow broke beneath him. Bran watched his life go swirling off in the water.
布兰喉头的匕首松落，大汉晃了晃，面朝下倒在溪里。箭被他压断，布兰看着他的血淌进水中。
Osha glanced around as Father’s guardsmen appeared from beneath the trees, steel in hand. She threw down her spear. “Mercy, m’lord,” she called to Robb.
欧莎四处张望；父亲的侍卫从树底下冒出来，手里都握着武器。她连忙抛下长枪。“大人饶命。”她朝罗柏叫道。
The guardsmen had a strange, pale look to their faces as they took in the scene of slaughter. They eyed the wolves uncertainly, and when Summer returned to Hali’s corpse to feed, Joseth dropped his knife and scrambled for the bush, heaving. Even Maester Luwin seemed shocked as he stepped from behind a tree, but only for an instant. Then he shook his head and waded across the stream to Bran’s side. “Are you hurt?”
见到眼前的屠杀景象，卫士们个个脸色苍白，神情怪异。他们犹豫地看着两只狼，而当夏天回去享用哈莉的尸体时，乔赛斯丢下猎刀，转身返回树丛边呕吐。就连鲁温师傅从林子里出来时，也是一脸惊骇。他随即恢复过来，摇摇头，涉水渡河到布兰身边。“你受伤了吗？”
“He cut my leg,” Bran said, “but I couldn’t feel it.”
“他砍伤了我的脚，”布兰说：“可我没感觉。”
As the maester knelt to examine the wound, Bran turned his head. Theon Greyjoy stood beside a sentinel tree, his bow in hand. He was smiling. Ever smiling. A half-dozen arrows were thrust into the soft ground at his feet, but it had taken only one. “A dead enemy is a thing of beauty,” he announced.
老师傅弯身检视他的伤口，布兰别过头去，看见席恩·葛雷乔伊站在一棵哨兵树下，手里拿着弓，嘴上挂着笑。这家伙永远都在微笑。他脚边的软泥地上插了五六枝箭，但他只用了一枝。“最好的敌人就是死掉的敌人。”他得意洋洋地表示。
“Jon always said you were an ass, Greyjoy,” Robb said loudly. “I ought to chain you up in the yard and let Bran take a few practice shots at you.”
“葛雷乔伊，琼恩老说你是个浑球。”罗柏朗声道，“我真该用铁链把你绑起来，放在场子里给布兰当箭靶。”
“You should be thanking me for saving your brother’s life.”
“你怎么不谢谢我救了你老弟的命？”
“What if you had missed the shot?” Robb said. “What if you’d only wounded him? What if you had made his hand jump, or hit Bran instead? For all you knew, the man might have been wearing a breastplate, all you could see was the back of his cloak. What would have happened to my brother then? Did you ever think of that , Greyjoy?”
“要是你没射中怎么办？”罗柏道，“要是你没射死他怎么办？要是你那一箭抖了他的手，或是命中布兰怎么办？你从后面只看得到他的斗篷，怎么知道他没穿胸甲？如果他真的穿了，那我弟弟会怎么样？葛雷乔伊，你有没有想过？”
Theon’s smile was gone. He gave a sullen shrug and began to pull his arrows from the ground, one by one.
席恩的笑容消失了。他悻悻地耸肩，然后开始把箭一根根从地上拔起来。
Robb glared at his guardsmen. “Where were you?” he demanded of them. “I was sure you were close behind us.”
罗柏瞪着侍卫们。“你们跑哪儿去了？”他质问，“我要你们紧跟在后。”
The men traded unhappy glances. “We were following, m’lord,” said Quent, the youngest of them, his beard a soft brown fuzz. “Only first we waited for Maester Luwin and his ass, begging your pardons, and then, well, as it were …” He glanced over at Theon and quickly looked away, abashed.
守卫们交换着闷闷不乐的眼神。“大人，我们是跟在后面。”里面年纪最轻，长了棕色细胡的昆特说，“可我们要等鲁温师傅和他的驴，请大人原谅，然后，这个嘛，就是……”他瞄了席恩一眼，随即尴尬地别开头。
“I spied a turkey,” Theon said, annoyed by the question. “How was I to know that you’d leave the boy alone?”
“我在路上看到只火鸡，”席恩气恼地说，“我哪知道你会丢下小鬼不管？”
Robb turned his head to look at Theon once more. Bran had never seen him so angry, yet he said nothing. Finally he knelt beside Maester Luwin. “How badly is my brother wounded?”
罗柏再度转头瞪看席恩。布兰从未见他这么生气过，但他没有多说，只在鲁温师傅身旁蹲下来。“我弟弟的伤势如何？”
“No more than a scratch,” the maester said. He wet a cloth in the stream to clean the cut. “Two of them wear the black,” he told Robb as he worked.
“破了点皮罢了。”老学士说。他把一块布在溪里浸湿，用来清洗伤口。“有两个人穿着黑衫军的衣服。”他边弄边告诉罗柏。
Robb glanced over at where Stiv lay sprawled in the stream, his ragged black cloak moving fitfully as the rushing waters tugged at it. “Deserters from the Night’s Watch,” he said grimly. “They must have been fools, to come so close to Winterfell.”
罗柏转头望向倒卧溪中的史帝夫，溪流不断拉扯着他破烂的黑斗篷。“守夜人军团的逃兵，”他口气严峻地说，“他们一定是没脑子，才会跑到离临冬城这么近的地方来。”
“Folly and desperation are ofttimes hard to tell apart,” said Maester Luwin.
“由愚蠢或绝望所生的行为，彼此常常难以区分。”鲁温师傅道。
“Shall we bury them, m’lord?” asked Quent.
“大人，我们要埋葬他们吗？”昆特问。
“They would not have buried us,” Robb said. “Hack off their heads, we’ll send them back to the Wall. Leave the rest for the carrion crows.”
“他们可不打算为我们安葬。”罗柏说，“把头砍下，送到长城。剩下的就留给乌鸦。”
“And this one?” Quent jerked a thumb toward Osha.
“那她呢？”昆特用拇指指了指欧莎。
Robb walked over to her. She was a head taller than he was, but she dropped to her knees at his approach. “Give me my life, m’lord of Stark, and I am yours.”
罗柏朝她走去。她比罗柏足足高出一头，但见他过来，却连忙跪下。“史塔克大人，求您饶我一命，我的人是您的了。”
“Mine? What would I do with an oathbreaker?”
“我的人？我要个背誓者做什么？”
“I broke no oaths. Stiv and Wallen flew down off the Wall, not me. The black crows got no place for women.”
“我没有背弃誓约。从长城逃出来的是史帝夫和华伦，不是我。那群黑乌鸦不收女人。”
Theon Greyjoy sauntered closer. “Give her to the wolves,” he urged Robb. The woman’s eyes went to what was left of Hali, and just as quickly away. She shuddered. Even the guardsmen looked queasy.
席恩·葛雷乔伊慢悠悠地晃过来。“拿她喂狼。”他怂恿罗柏。女人的视线望向哈莉的残骸，赶紧颤抖着转开。那景象连侍卫们看了也直想吐。
“She’s a woman,” Robb said.
“她是个女的。”罗柏说。
“A wildling,” Bran told him. “She said they should keep me alive so they could take me to Mance Rayder.”
“也是个野人。”布兰告诉他，“是她叫他们留我活口，好把我交给曼斯·雷德的。”
“Do you have a name?” Robb asked her.
“你有名字吗？”罗柏问她。
“Osha, as it please the lord,” she muttered sourly.
“大人高兴的话，叫我欧莎就成。”她酸酸地低声道。
Maester Luwin stood. “We might do well to question her.”
鲁温师傅站起来。“盘问一番比较稳妥。”
Bran could see the relief on his brother’s face. “As you say, Maester. Wayn, bind her hands. She’ll come back to Winterfell with us … and live or die by the truths she gives us.”
布兰看见哥哥脸上如释重负的表情。“那就这样罢，师傅。韦恩，把她的手捆起来。她跟我们一起回临冬城……是生是死，就得由她的话来决定了。”
*TYRION
第三十九章 提利昂
“Y ou want eat?” Mord asked, glowering. He had a plate of boiled beans in one thick, stub-fingered hand.
“你想不想吃？”手指粗大的莫德拿着一盘煮豆子，瞪着他问。
Tyrion Lannister was starved, but he refused to let this brute see him cringe. “A leg of lamb would be pleasant,” he said, from the heap of soiled straw in the corner of his cell. “Perhaps a dish of peas and onions, some fresh baked bread with butter, and a flagon of mulled wine to wash it down. Or beer, if that’s easier. I try not to be overly particular.”
提利昂·兰尼斯特虽然饥肠辘辘，却不愿让这粗汉享受到虐待的快感。“有根羊腿一定很棒，”他坐在牢房角落脏兮兮的稻草堆上说，“或许再来一碟青豆和洋葱，上点刚出炉的奶油面包，再配一壶温过的葡萄酒把食物冲下肚。如果不方便的话，啤酒也行，我这个人向来不太挑剔。”
“Is beans,” Mord said. “Here.” He held out the plate.
“只有豆子。”莫德说：“拿去。”他递出盘子。
Tyrion sighed. The turnkey was twenty stone of gross stupidity, with brown rotting teeth and small dark eyes. The left side of his face was slick with scar where an axe had cut off his ear and part of his cheek. He was as predictable as he was ugly, but Tyrion was hungry. He reached up for the plate.
提利昂叹口气。这名狱卒既肥又笨，满口褐色烂牙，细小的深色眼睛。他左半边脸都是伤疤，那是之前被斧头削去耳朵和部分脸颊所留下的痕迹。虽然他愚蠢又丑陋，但提利昂肚子真是饿了。他伸手去拿盘子。
Mord jerked it away, grinning. “Is here,” he said, holding it out beyond Tyrion’s reach.
莫德嘻嘻笑着挪开盘子。“在这儿。”他说，一边把盘子举到提利昂够不着的地方。
The dwarf climbed stiffly to his feet, every joint aching. “Must we play the same fool’s game with every meal?” He made another grab for the beans.
侏儒僵硬地爬起身，每个关节都在叫痛。“我们每次吃饭都得玩这笨游戏吗？”他又伸手去拿。
Mord shambled backward, grinning through his rotten teeth. “Is here, dwarf man.” He held the plate out at arm’s length, over the edge where the cell ended and the sky began. “You not want eat? Here. Come take.”
莫德蹒跚着后退，露出烂牙嘻笑道：“小矮人，在这儿。”他伸直了手，把盘子放到牢房尽头的半空上。“你不想吃？在这，来拿啊。”
Tyrion’s arms were too short to reach the plate, and he was not about to step that close to the edge. All it would take would be a quick shove of Mord’s heavy white belly, and he would end up a sickening red splotch on the stones of Sky, like so many other prisoners of the Eyrie over the centuries. “Come to think on it, I’m not hungry after all,” he declared, retreating to the corner of his cell.
提利昂的手臂太短，够不到盘子，更何况他不打算靠近牢房边缘。莫德只需用他白白的大肚子一推，他就会变成长天堡岩顶上的一瘫恶心红渍，像几世纪以来鹰巢城的许多犯人一样。“仔细想想，我并不太饿哩。”他宣布，又退回监狱的角落。
Mord grunted and opened his thick fingers. The wind took the plate, flipping it over as it fell. A handful of beans sprayed back at them as the food tumbled out of sight. The turnkey laughed, his gut shaking like a bowl of pudding.
莫德咕哝着松开他肥胖的手指。强风吹走盘子，坠落的途中不断翻滚。食物飞出视线，还有几颗豆子被吹回来。狱卒哈哈大笑，肚子像一碗布丁似地摇晃。
Tyrion felt a pang of rage. “You fucking son of a pox-ridden ass,” he spat. “I hope you die of a bloody flux.”
提利昂只觉怒火中烧。“你这操他妈狗娘养的烂货，”他啐道，“祝你早日七孔流血而死。”
For that, Mord gave him a kick, driving a steel-toed boot hard into Tyrion’s ribs on the way out. “I take it back!” he gasped as he doubled over on the straw. “I’ll kill you myself, I swear it!” The heavy iron-bound door slammed shut. Tyrion heard the rattle of keys.
因为他这番话，莫德出去的时候，狠狠踢了他一脚，钢靴正中提利昂的肋骨。“我收回刚说的话！”他倒在稻草堆上，喘着气说，“我要亲自宰了你，我发誓！”厚重的铁门轰地关上，提利昂听见钥匙转动的声音。
For a small man, he had been cursed with a dangerously big mouth, he reflected as he crawled back to his corner of what the Arryns laughably called their dungeon. He huddled beneath the thin blanket that was his only bedding, staring out at a blaze of empty blue sky and distant mountains that seemed to go on forever, wishing he still had the shadowskin cloak he’d won from Marillion at dice, after the singer had stolen it off the body of that brigand chief. The skin had smelled of blood and mold, but it was warm and thick. Mord had taken it the moment he laid eyes on it.
对他这样的小个子而言，他很不幸地生了张非常危险的大嘴巴，他一边爬回角落一边想，艾林家的人竟把这称为他们的“地牢”，真叫人哭笑不得。他蜷缩在薄薄的毡子下——那是他惟一的被褥——向外望着那片刺眼的空虚蓝天，以及好似漫无边际的缥缈峰峦，暗想着如果还保有那件影子山猫皮披风，不知该有多好。披风是马瑞里安从山贼头目的尸首上扒去的，后来歌手和他赌骰子输了，便落入他手中。山猫皮虽然散发着霉味和血腥，却很温暖厚实。可惜莫德一看到便把它抢走了。
The wind tugged at his blanket with gusts sharp as talons. His cell was miserably small, even for a dwarf. Not five feet away, where a wall ought to have been, where a wall would be in a proper dungeon, the floor ended and the sky began. He had plenty of fresh air and sunshine, and the moon and stars by night, but Tyrion would have traded it all in an instant for the dankest, gloomiest pit in the bowels of the Casterly Rock.
尖如利爪的劲风扯着他的毛毯。即使对他这个侏儒来说，牢房也嫌太小。倘若这里真是“地牢”，那么不到五英尺外，原本应该有墙。相反，那里却是地板尽头和天空的交界。虽然这里白天空气新鲜，阳光耀眼，夜里也有繁星与明月，提利昂却宁可拿凯岩城底部最阴暗潮湿的坑洞来交换。
“You fly,” Mord had promised him, when he’d shoved him into the cell. “Twenty day, thirty, fifty maybe. Then you fly.”
“你飞，”之前莫德一把推他进来时，曾向他保证。“经过二十天，三十天，最多五十天，你就会飞。”
The Arryns kept the only dungeon in the realm where the prisoners were welcome to escape at will. That first day, after girding up his courage for hours, Tyrion had lain flat on his stomach and squirmed to the edge, to poke out his head and look down. Sky was six hundred feet below, with nothing between but empty air. If he craned his neck out as far as it could go, he could see other cells to his right and left and above him. He was a bee in a stone honeycomb, and someone had torn off his wings.
放眼七国全境，只有艾林家族的地牢鼓励犯人逃脱。进来的第一天，提利昂花了好几个小时，才鼓起勇气趴在地上，慢慢爬到山崖边，探出头往下望。正下方六百英尺，坐落着长天堡，与他的囚室之间除了空气，什么也没有。如果他伸长脖子，可以看到在他左右两方的其他牢房。他是石头蜂窝里的一只蜜蜂，还被人折了翅膀。
It was cold in the cell, the wind screamed night and day, and worst of all, the floor sloped . Ever so slightly, yet it was enough. He was afraid to close his eyes, afraid that he might roll over in his sleep and wake in sudden terror as he went sliding off the edge. Small wonder the sky cells drove men mad.
囚室极冷，山风日夜呼啸，最糟的是地板竟然向外倾斜。虽然幅度不大，但也够他受了。他不敢闭眼，害怕沉睡时会滚落悬崖，然后惊恐地在半空中醒来。难怪天牢会把人逼疯。
Gods save me , some previous tenant had written on the wall in something that looked suspiciously like blood, the blue is calling . At first Tyrion wondered who he’d been, and what had become of him; later, he decided that he would rather not know.
诸神救救我，某个之前住在这里的囚犯，用疑似血液的东西在地上涂写了如是的文字，蓝天呼唤着我。起先提利昂还猜测这人是谁，以及他下场如何；后来再想想，觉得自己还是别知道的好。
If only he had shut his mouth …
要是他闭上嘴巴就好了……
The wretched boy had started it, looking down on him from a throne of carved weirwood beneath the moon-and-falcon banners of House Arryn. Tyrion Lannister had been looked down on all his life, but seldom by rheumy-eyed six-year-olds who needed to stuff fat cushions under their cheeks to lift them to the height of a man. “Is he the bad man?” the boy had asked, clutching his doll.
一切都是从那高高坐在鱼梁木雕刻的王座上，头顶飘扬着艾林家族的新月猎鹰旗帜，睥睨着他的该死小鬼开始的。提利昂这辈子经常被人轻贱，然而被眼睛湿黏黏，得坐在厚厚的垫子上才有正常人高度的六岁小鬼如此看待，还是头一遭。“他就是那个坏人吗？”小鬼抱着玩偶问。
“He is,” the Lady Lysa had said from the lesser throne beside him. She was all in blue, powdered and perfumed for the suitors who filled her court.
“就是他。”莱莎夫人坐在他旁边一张较小的王座上，一袭蓝衣，为了满足追求者，特别扑了粉又喷了香水。
“He’s so small,” the Lord of the Eyrie said, giggling.
“他好小一点点呀。”鹰巢城公爵咯咯笑着说。
“This is Tyrion the Imp, of House Lannister, who murdered your father.” She raised her voice so it carried down the length of High Hall of the Eyrie, ringing off the milk-white walls and the slender pillars, so every man could hear it. “He slew the Hand of the King!”
“这是兰尼斯特家的小恶魔提利昂，谋害你父亲的就是他。”她提高音量，所讲的话传遍整个鹰巢城大厅，在乳白色墙壁和纤细的柱子间回荡，让每个人都听得到。“他害死了国王的首相！”
“Oh, did I kill him too?” Tyrion had said, like a fool.
“哦，原来他也是我杀的？”提利昂像个蠢蛋似地反问。
That would have been a very good time to have kept his mouth closed and his head bowed. He could see that now; seven hells, he had seen it then. The High Hall of the Arryns was long and austere, with a forbidding coldness to its walls of blue-veined white marble, but the faces around him had been colder by far. The power of Casterly Rock was far away, and there were no friends of the Lannisters in the Vale of Arryn. Submission and silence would have been his best defenses.
那个时候，他本应当低下头颅，乖乖闭紧嘴巴。他早该想到的，七层地狱，其实他当时又何尝不知。艾林家的议事厅堂硕长而俭朴，蓝纹的白色大理石墙，有股令人难以亲近的寒意，然而周遭众人的脸色，才真叫人心寒。此处凯岩城势力鞭长莫及，艾林谷中也少有亲兰尼斯特人士。总的说来，态度屈从，保持沉默，实是他最佳防御。
But Tyrion’s mood had been too foul for sense. To his shame, he had faltered during the last leg of their day-long climb up to the Eyrie, his stunted legs unable to take him any higher. Bronn had carried him the rest of the way, and the humiliation poured oil on the flames of his anger. “It would seem I’ve been a busy little fellow,” he said with bitter sarcasm. “I wonder when I found the time to do all this slaying and murdering.”
然而那时提利昂心情正恶，哪还顾得了理智。在上鹰巢城长达一整天的攀爬之行最后，他发育缺陷的双腿实在无法行走，只好很丢脸地让波隆背他上山。此刻所受的羞辱，无疑对他本已炽烈的怒意火上添油。“看来我还真是个忙碌的小家伙，”他口气酸苦地讥讽道，“连自己都不知道哪来的时间杀这杀那。”
He ought to have remembered who he was dealing with. Lysa Arryn and her half-sane weakling son had not been known at court for their love of wit, especially when it was directed at them.
他早该想起自己面对的是谁。莱莎·艾林和她那半疯的虚弱小鬼对耍弄机智向无好感，尤其是针对他们的时候，这在宫里是人尽皆知的事。
“Imp,” Lysa said coldly, “you will guard that mocking tongue of yours and speak to my son politely, or I promise you will have cause to regret it. Remember where you are. This is the Eyrie, and these are knights of the Vale you see around you, true men who loved Jon Arryn well. Every one of them would die for me.”
“小恶魔，”莱莎冷冷地说，“你最好管紧你那张碎嘴，对我儿子客气点，否则保证你后悔。不要忘记自己身在何处，这里是鹰巢城，你周围的人都是艾林谷的骑士，个个忠贞不贰，对琼恩·艾林敬爱有加，他们每个人都愿意为我牺牲性命。”
“Lady Arryn, should any harm come to me, my brother Jaime will be pleased to see that they do.” Even as he spat out the words, Tyrion knew they were folly.
“艾林夫人，我要有什么不测，我老哥詹姆绝对很乐意料理他们。”话出口的刹那，提利昂发觉这么说实在愚蠢。
“Can you fly, my lord of Lannister?” Lady Lysa asked. “Does a dwarf have wings? If not, you would be wiser to swallow the next threat that comes to mind.”
“兰尼斯特大人，敢问您会飞吗？”莱莎夫人问，“侏儒有没有长翅膀啊？如果没有，您最好乖乖地把其他威胁都吞下肚去。”
“I made no threats,” Tyrion said. “That was a promise.”
“我这不是威胁，”提利昂道，“而是保证。”
Little Lord Robert hopped to his feet at that, so upset he dropped his doll. “You can’t hurt us,” he screamed. “No one can hurt us here. Tell him, Mother, tell him he can’t hurt us here.” The boy began to twitch.
一听这话，小劳勃公爵跳将起来，气得连玩偶都丢了。“你不能对我们怎样，”他尖叫，“没有人敢在这里乱来。妈咪，你告诉他，跟他说谁也别想来这里撒野。”小男孩开始浑身痉挛。
“The Eyrie is impregnable,” Lysa Arryn declared calmly. She drew her son close, holding him safe in the circle of her plump white arms. “The Imp is trying to frighten us, sweet baby. The Lannisters are all liars. No one will hurt my sweet boy.”
“没有人能攻破鹰巢城。”莱莎·艾林冷静地宣布。她把儿子拉过去，用她丰满白皙的臂膀抱住他。“小宝贝，小恶魔只是虚张声势，兰尼斯特家的人通通是骗子。谁也别想欺负我的小亲亲。”
The hell of it was, she was no doubt right. Having seen what it took to get here, Tyrion could well imagine how it would be for a knight trying to fight his way up in armor, while stones and arrows poured down from above and enemies contested with him for every step. Nightmare did not begin to describe it. Small wonder the Eyrie had never been taken.
她虽然可恶，但说得的确没错。亲眼目睹这里的险要地势之后，提利昂可以想像叫全副武装的骑士，冒着从山上倾注而下的落石箭雨，每走一步阶梯还得对付迎面而来的敌人，会是件多么困难的事。说那是场梦魇，恐怕还不足以形容，难怪鹰巢城自古以来从未陷落。
Still, Tyrion had been unable to silence himself. “Not impregnable,” he said, “merely inconvenient.”
即使这样，提利昂的舌头还是停不下来。“不是攻不破，”他说，“而是不太好攻破。”
Young Robert pointed down, his hand trembling. “You’re a liar . Mother, I want to see him fly.” Two guardsmen in sky-blue cloaks seized Tyrion by the arms, lifting him off his floor.
小劳勃伸出颤抖的手指着他：“你是个骗子。妈咪，我想看他飞。”两个穿天蓝色披风的卫士抓住提利昂双手，把他架离地面。
The gods only know what might have happened then were it not for Catelyn Stark. “Sister,” she called out from where she stood below the thrones, “I beg you to remember, this man is my prisoner. I will not have him harmed.”
若不是凯特琳·史塔克，恐怕只有天上诸神才知道接下来会发生什么。“妹妹，”她站在王座下方，朝莱莎喊，“请你记得，他是我的犯人，请不要伤害他。”
Lysa Arryn glanced at her sister coolly for a moment, then rose and swept down on Tyrion, her long skirts trailing after her. For an instant he feared she would strike him, but instead she commanded them to release him. Her men shoved him to the floor, his legs went out from under him, and Tyrion fell.
莱莎·艾林冷冷地看了她姐姐一会儿，然后起身走向提利昂，她的长裙拖在身后。他原本怕她会动手打人，但她却下令放开他。两个卫士把提利昂丢到地上，他双脚扑空，摔倒在地。
He must have made quite a sight as he struggled to his knees, only to feel his right leg spasm, sending him sprawling once more. Laughter boomed up and down the High Hall of the Arryns.
他出丑的模样想必难看得很；不料他正挣扎着要站起来，右脚竟然抽筋，结果再度瘫在地上。艾林家的大厅里响起哄堂大笑。
“My sister’s little guest is too weary to stand,” Lady Lysa announced. “Ser Vardis, take him down to the dungeon. A rest in one of our sky cells will do him much good.”
“我姐姐的小客人累了，连站都站不稳。”莱莎夫人宣布，“瓦狄斯爵士，麻烦你带他到地牢去。在天上休息休息，想必对他的健康大有助益。”
The guardsmen jerked him upright. Tyrion Lannister dangled between them, kicking feebly, his face red with shame. “I will remember this,” he told them all as they carried him off.
卫兵猛地把他拉起。提利昂·兰尼斯特在两人中间双脚悬空，虚弱地踢打，羞得满脸通红。“咱们走着瞧。”被架走前，他对全厅的人说。
And so he did, for all the good it did him.
到目前为止，他还瞧不出有什么解决办法。
At first he had consoled himself that this imprisonment could not last long. Lysa Arryn wanted to humble him, that was all. She would send for him again, and soon. If not her, then Catelyn Stark would want to question him. This time he would guard his tongue more closely. They dare not kill him out of hand; he was still a Lannister of Casterly Rock, and if they shed his blood, it would mean war. Or so he had told himself.
起先他安慰自己，认为监禁不会太久。莱莎·艾林不过是想羞辱他。她一定会很快再传他过去。就算她没有，凯特琳·史塔克也会来盘问他。这次他会小心措辞、不乱说话。他们不可能现在就杀他，再怎么说，他都是凯岩城的兰尼斯特家人，他们若敢杀他，便意味着开战。至少，他是这么告诉自己。
Now he was not so certain.
然而现在他却不那么确定了。
Perhaps his captors only meant to let him rot here, but he feared he did not have the strength to rot for long. He was growing weaker every day, and it was only a matter of time until Mord’s kicks and blows did him serious harm, provided the gaoler did not starve him to death first. A few more nights of cold and hunger, and the blue would start calling to him too.
或许他们只打算让他烂在这里，怕只怕自己连烂久点的力气都没有。他日渐虚弱，距离莫德把他踢成重伤，只是时间的问题。这还得以狱卒没先把他饿死为前提。再来几个饥寒交迫的夜晚，蓝天就会呼唤他了。
He wondered what was happening beyond the walls (such as they were) of his cell. Lord Tywin would surely have sent out riders when the word reached him. Jaime might be leading a host through the Mountains of the Moon even now … unless he was riding north against Winterfell instead. Did anyone outside the Vale even suspect where Catelyn Stark had taken him? He wondered what Cersei would do when she heard. The king could order him freed, but would Robert listen to his queen or his Hand? Tyrion had no illusions about the king’s love for his sister.
他不禁猜想囚室围墙（虽然根本没有围墙）之外是怎样一番情形。泰温公爵接获消息后一定会派出使者。说不定这会儿詹姆已带着军队，穿越明月山脉而来……或者他直接对付临冬城？峡谷之外，谁会猜到凯特琳·史塔克把他绑架到这里呢？他很好奇，瑟曦得知消息后会采取何种行动。国王自可下令释放他，但劳勃究竟会听他王后的话，还是他首相的话呢？国王对姐姐的感情有多深，提利昂可是一清二楚。
If Cersei kept her wits about her, she would insist the king sit in judgment of Tyrion himself. Even Ned Stark could scarcely object to that, not without impugning the honor of the king. And Tyrion would be only too glad to take his chances in a trial. Whatever murders they might lay at his door, the Starks had no proof of anything so far as he could see. Let them make their case before the Iron Throne and the lords of the land. It would be the end of them. If only Cersei were clever enough to see that …
若瑟曦肯仔细盘算，她应该坚持要国王亲自审判提利昂。这样一来，连奈德·史塔克也没法反对，否则便有损国王名誉。对提利昂来说，能有公开审判的机会，自是求之不得。无论他们给他安上什么罪名，到目前为止，他看不出他们能提出任何有力证据。就让他们当着铁王座和全国诸侯的面审理这个案子吧，那么他们铁定完蛋。如果瑟曦真有这么机灵就好了……
Tyrion Lannister sighed. His sister was not without a certain low cunning, but her pride blinded her. She would see the insult in this, not the opportunity. And Jaime was even worse, rash and headstrong and quick to anger. His brother never untied a knot when he could slash it in two with his sword.
提利昂·兰尼斯特叹了口气。姐姐是有些许小聪明，却常常被她的傲慢所蒙蔽。她只会把这件事当成奇耻大辱，却看不到里面蕴藏的机会。至于刚愎轻率又冲动易怒的詹姆，那就更别提了。遇到绳结，只要能用剑斩成两段，哥哥是决计不会动脑筋解开的。
He wondered which of them had sent the footpad to silence the Stark boy, and whether they had truly conspired at the death of Lord Arryn. If the old Hand had been murdered, it was deftly and subtly done. Men of his age died of sudden illness all the time. In contrast, sending some oaf with a stolen knife after Brandon Stark struck him as unbelievably clumsy. And wasn’t that peculiar, come to think on it …
他倒想知道派小贼去杀那史塔克小鬼灭口的，究竟是哥哥还是姐姐，也很好奇艾林大人的死，到底与他们有没有关系。倘若老首相当真是被害死，还真是干得干净利落。像他那年纪的人突然染病身亡本就稀松平常。反过来讲，找个呆头鹅拿着偷来的刀去杀布兰登·史塔克，却是笨得不像话的作法。仔细想想，还真是奇怪……
Tyrion shivered. Now there was a nasty suspicion. Perhaps the direwolf and the lion were not the only beasts in the woods, and if that was true, someone was using him as a catspaw. Tyrion Lannister hated being used.
提利昂打了个冷颤。这是个下流的可能性。或许冰原狼和狮子并非森林里仅有的猛兽，果真如此，那肯定是有人拿他当替死鬼。提利昂·兰提斯特最恨被人利用。
He would have to get out of here, and soon. His chances of overpowering Mord were small to none, and no one was about to smuggle him a six-hundred-foot-long rope, so he would have to talk himself free. His mouth had gotten him into this cell; it could damn well get him out.
他得离开这鬼地方，越快越好。跟莫德以力相搏是不用想了，大概也不会有人拿来六百英尺长的绳子助他脱逃，所以他只能靠三寸不烂之舌脱身。他这张碎嘴害他进了大牢，一定也他妈的能让他重获自由。
Tyrion pushed himself to his feet, doing his best to ignore the slope of the floor beneath him, with its ever-so-subtle tug toward the edge. He hammered on the door with a fist. “Mord!” he shouted. “Turnkey! Mord, I want you!” He had to keep it up a good ten minutes before he heard footsteps. Tyrion stepped back an instant before the door opened with a crash.
提利昂站起来，努力不去注意脚下轻轻把他拖向悬崖边的倾斜地面。他握拳敲门。“莫德！”他喊道，“看门的！莫德，我要跟你谈谈！”他足足捶了十分钟才听见脚步声。铁门轰然打开的前一刻，提利昂及时跳开。
“Making noise,” Mord growled, with blood in his eyes. Dangling from one meaty hand was a leather strap, wide and thick, doubled over in his fist.
“好吵。”莫德满眼血丝地咆哮道。他一只肥手里握着一条又粗又宽的皮带，对折了抓在掌心。
Never show them you’re afraid , Tyrion reminded himself. “How would you like to be rich?” he asked.
别让他们知道你害怕，提利昂提醒自己。“你想不想发财？”他问。
Mord hit him. He swung the strap backhand, lazily, but the leather caught Tyrion high on the arm. The force of it staggered him, and the pain made him grit his teeth. “No mouth, dwarf man,” Mord warned him.
莫德揍他。他反手懒懒地挥出皮带，打中提利昂上臂。力道震得他脚步不稳，痛得他咬紧牙根。“矮冬瓜，别吵。”莫德警告他。
“Gold,” Tyrion said, miming a smile. “Casterly Rock is full of gold … ahhhh …” This time the blow was a forehand, and Mord put more of his arm into the swing, making the leather crack and jump. It caught Tyrion in the ribs and dropped him to his knees, wimpering. He forced himself to look up at the gaoler. “As rich as the Lannisters,” he wheezed. “That’s what they say, Mord—”
“金子，”提利昂装出笑，“凯岩城里到处都是金子……啊啊啊……”这回莫德用了力，皮带一声爆裂，自他手中蹦跳到提利昂肋骨上，痛得他当即跪下呻吟。他强迫自己抬头看着狱卒。“跟兰尼斯特家一样有钱，”他呼吸困难地说，“他们不都这样说么？莫德——”
Mord grunted. The strap whistled through the air and smashed Tyrion full in the face. The pain was so bad he did not remember falling, but when he opened his eyes again he was on the floor of his cell. His ear was ringing, and his mouth was full of blood. He groped for purchase, to push himself up, and his fingers brushed against … nothing. Tyrion snatched his hand back as fast as if it had been scalded, and tried his best to stop breathing. He had fallen right on the edge, inches from the blue.
莫德咕哝一声，皮带划破空气，正中提利昂面门。他天旋地转，连自己是如何摔倒都不记得。再睁眼时，他发现人躺在牢房地上，耳鸣不已，满嘴是血。他伸手想找个支撑爬起来，结果手指摸到的却是……什么也没有。提利昂飞快地抽回手，仿佛被烫到似的，憋气不敢呼吸。他刚好落在山崖边，距离蓝天只有几寸之遥。
“More to say?” Mord held the strap between his fists and gave it a sharp pull. The snap made Tyrion jump. The turnkey laughed.
“还要说吗？”莫德双手各握皮带一端，猛力一扯，啪的一声把提利昂吓得跳脚，狱卒乐得哈哈大笑。
He won’t push me over , Tyrion told himself desperately as he crawled away from the edge. Catelyn Stark wants me alive, he doesn’t dare kill me . He wiped the blood off his lips with the back of his hand, grinned, and said, “That was a stiff one, Mord.” The gaoler squinted at him, trying to decide if he was being mocked. “I could make good use of a strong man like you.” The strap flew at him, but this time Tyrion was able to cringe away from it. He took a glancing blow to the shoulder, nothing more. “Gold,” he repeated, scrambling backward like a crab, “more gold than you’ll see here in a lifetime. Enough to buy land, women, horses … you could be a lord. Lord Mord.” Tyrion hawked up a glob of blood and phlegm and spat it out into the sky.
他不敢把我推下去，提利昂一边从崖边爬回来，一边绝望地告诉自己。凯特琳·史塔克要留我活口，他绝对不敢杀我。他用手背抹抹唇上的血，嘻嘻笑道：“莫德，刚刚那下可真带劲。”狱卒眯眼看他，不知这是讽刺还是真心话。“我用得着你这么强壮的人。”皮带打过来，但这回提利昂缩身闪过。“我说的可是金子，”他像只螃蟹似地爬回来，重复道，“你一辈子都用不完的金子，买土地、女人、好马都不成问题……你还可以当个贵族老爷。‘莫德大人’，听起来不赖吧？”提利昂咳出一大口血和黏黏的东西，朝天空吐去。
“Is no gold,” Mord said.
“没有金子。”莫德说。
He’s listening! Tyrion thought. “They relieved me of my purse when they captured me, but the gold is still mine. Catelyn Stark might take a man prisoner, but she’d never stoop to rob him. That wouldn’t be honorable. Help me, and all the gold is yours.” Mord’s strap licked out, but it was a halfhearted, desultory swing, slow and contemptuous. Tyrion caught the leather in his hand and held it prisoned. “There will be no risk to you. All you need do is deliver a message.”
他上钩了！提利昂心想。“他们抓我的时候把我的钱包搜走了，但钱还是我的。凯特琳·史塔克抓的是我的人，不至于纡尊降贵，抢我的钱。干那种事不光彩。只要你肯帮我，里面所有的金子都是你的了。”莫德的皮带再度扑来，但只是漫不经心地一挥，动作缓慢，充满轻蔑。提利昂伸手抓住皮带，这下他成了他的囚犯。“你完全不用冒风险，只要帮我传个口信就成。”
The gaoler yanked his leather strap free of Tyrion’s grasp. “Message,” he said, as if he had never heard the word before. His frown made deep creases in his brow.
狱卒把皮带从提利昂手中抽回。“口信？”他说，就好像以前从没听过这两个字。他一皱眉，额头上便现出许多深陷的凹痕。
“You heard me, my lord. Only carry my word to your lady. Tell her …” What? What would possibly make Lysa Arryn relent? The inspiration came to Tyrion Lannister suddenly. “… tell her that I wish to confess my crimes.”
“是的，莫德大人，你听我说什么，就去跟你家夫人说什么。告诉她……”告诉她什么？如何才能打动莱莎·艾林？提利昂·兰尼斯特突然灵光一现。“……告诉她我打算认罪。”
Mord raised his arm and Tyrion braced himself for another blow, but the turnkey hesitated. Suspicion and greed warred in his eyes. He wanted that gold, yet he feared a trick; he had the look of a man who had often been tricked. “Is lie,” he muttered darkly. “Dwarf man cheat me.”
莫德举起手，提利昂做好挨打的准备，但狱卒迟迟没有下手。怀疑和贪婪在他眼里交战。他想要金子，却怕被骗；看来他以前似乎常被人戏弄。“骗人，”他阴沉地喃喃道，“矮冬瓜骗我。”
“I will put my promise in writing,” Tyrion vowed.
“要不咱们白纸黑字写清楚。”提利昂发誓。
Some illiterates held writing in disdain; others seemed to have a superstitious reverence for the written word, as if it were some sort of magic. Fortunately, Mord was one of the latter. The turnkey lowered the strap. “Writing down gold. Much gold.”
有些文盲对文字特别厌恶，有些则迷信般地将其奉若神明，仿佛那是种魔法。幸运的是，莫德属于后者。狱卒放下皮带：“写下金子，很多金子。”
“Oh, much gold,” Tyrion assured him. “The purse is just a taste, my friend. My brother wears armor of solid gold plate.” In truth, Jaime’s armor was gilded steel, but this oaf would never know the difference.
“喔，很多很多，”提利昂向他担保，“亲爱的好朋友，我的钱包只是开胃小菜。我老哥连铠甲都是从头到尾用金子打的。”事实上，詹姆的盔甲是钢做的，只是镀上一层金，但这驴蛋反正也分不出来。
Mord fingered his strap thoughtfully, but in the end, he relented and went to fetch paper and ink. When the letter was written, the gaoler frowned at it suspiciously. “Now deliver my message,” Tyrion urged.
莫德把玩着皮带，不过最后还是妥协地取来纸和墨水。写好之后，狱卒狐疑地皱眉看着那张纸。“现在去帮我传口信罢。”提利昂催促。
He was shivering in his sleep when they came for him, late that night. Mord opened the door but kept his silence. Ser Vardis Egen woke Tyrion with the point of his boot. “On your feet, Imp. My lady wants to see you.”
当天深夜，他们来找他时，他正在睡梦中发抖。莫德打开门，没有作声。瓦狄斯·伊根爵士用靴尖弄醒提利昂。“小恶魔，快起来，我家夫人要见你。”
Tyrion rubbed the sleep from his eyes and put on a grimace he scarcely felt. “No doubt she does, but what makes you think I wish to see her?”
提利昂揉去眼中睡意，故意装出一副不悦的神情。“她当然想，可你怎么知道我想见她呢？”
Ser Vardis frowned. Tyrion remembered him well from the years he had spent at King’s Landing as the captain of the Hand’s household guard. A square, plain face, silver hair, a heavy build, and no humor whatsoever. “Your wishes are not my concern. On your feet, or I’ll have you carried.”
瓦狄斯爵士皱起眉头。他早些年曾在君临担任首相的侍卫队长，提利昂对他印象深刻。这家伙生了张相貌平凡的宽脸，银发，身材粗壮，毫无幽默感可言。“你怎么想不干我事。快起来，不然我叫人把你架走。”
Tyrion clambered awkwardly to his feet. “A cold night,” he said casually, “and the High Hall is so drafty. I don’t wish to catch a chill. Mord, if you would be so good, fetch my cloak.”
提利昂笨拙地爬起身。“今晚可真冷，”他若无其事地说，“大厅里又那么通风，我可不想着凉。莫德，你行行好，把我的斗篷拿来罢。”
The gaoler squinted at him, face dull with suspicion.
狱卒眯眼看他，一脸大惑不解的表情。
“My cloak,” Tyrion repeated. “The shadowskin you took from me for safekeeping. You recall.”
“我的斗篷，”提利昂重复，“就你帮我保管的那件山猫皮披风，还记得吧？”
“Get him the damnable cloak,” Ser Vardis said.
“快把他妈的斗篷拿来。”瓦狄斯爵士道。
Mord did not dare grumble. He gave Tyrion a glare that promised future retribution, yet he went for the cloak. When he draped it around his prisoner’s neck, Tyrion smiled. “My thanks. I shall think of you whenever I wear it.” He flung the trailing end of the long fur over his right shoulder, and felt warm for the first time in days. “Lead on, Ser Vardis.”
莫德不敢吭声。他瞪了提利昂一眼，那神情似乎在向他保证将来一定会报复，但他还是照办了。当他为犯人披上斗篷时，提利昂微笑道：“多谢，以后我一穿上它就会想起你。”他把下垂的长边围上右肩，多日以来，第一次感觉到温暖。“瓦狄斯爵士，请带路。”
The High Hall of the Arryns was aglow with the light of fifty torches, burning in the sconces along the walls. The Lady Lysa wore black silk, with the moon-and-falcon sewn on her breast in pearls. Since she did not look the sort to join the Night’s Watch, Tyrion could only imagine that she had decided mourning clothes were appropriate garb for a confession. Her long auburn hair, woven into an elaborate braid, fell across her left shoulder. The taller throne beside her was empty; no doubt the little Lord of the Eyrie was off shaking in his sleep. Tyrion was thankful for that much, at least.
艾林家的大厅灯火通明，五十支火炬在墙壁的台座上熠熠发亮。莱莎夫人身着黑纱礼服，胸前配着珍珠绣的新月猎鹰纹章。既然她没打算加入守夜人军团，提利昂猜想，只怕她觉得听人认罪时惟一适合的就是丧服。她的红棕色长发扎成一个精巧的辫子，斜斜地垂在左肩。她旁边那个较高的王座是空的，想必鹰巢城的小公爵此刻正在睡梦中发抖罢。少了他总是好的。
He bowed deeply and took a moment to glance around the hall. Lady Arryn had summoned her knights and retainers to hear his confession, as he had hoped. He saw Ser Brynden Tully’s craggy face and Lord Nestor Royce’s bluff one. Beside Nestor stood a younger man with fierce black sidewhiskers who could only be his heir, Ser Albar. Most of the principal houses of the Vale were represented. Tyrion noted Ser Lyn Corbray, slender as a sword, Lord Hunter with his gouty legs, the widowed Lady Waynwood surrounded by her sons. Others sported sigils he did not know; broken lance, green viper, burning tower, winged chalice.
他深深一鞠躬，借机环顾在场人等。艾林夫人果然如他所愿，将麾下的骑士和随从召集来听他认罪。他看见布林登·徒利爵士历尽风霜的脸，以及好脾气的奈斯特·罗伊斯男爵。奈斯特身旁站了个年纪较轻的人，生了对锐利的黑色八字胡，定是他的继承人艾尔拔爵士。峡谷的首要贵族多半有代表到场。提利昂看到瘦得像把剑的林恩·科布瑞爵士，腿生痛风的杭特伯爵，以及身边儿子成群的寡妇韦伍德伯爵夫人。还有些家徽他不认识，如断裂长枪，绿色毒蛇，燃烧塔楼，以及粉红底上的带翅膀圣杯等等。
Among the lords of the Vale were several of his companions from the high road; Ser Rodrik Cassel, pale from half-healed wounds, stood with Ser Willis Wode beside him. Marillion the singer had found a new woodharp. Tyrion smiled; whatever happened here tonight, he did not wish it to happen in secret, and there was no one like a singer for spreading a story near and far.
峡谷众贵族间有几个是与他一道来的同伴。罗德利克·凯索爵士伤势未愈，脸色苍白，身旁站了维里·渥德爵士。吟游歌手马瑞里安弄到一把新的木头竖琴。提利昂不禁微笑，无论今晚会发生什么，他都不希望私下进行，而若要把事情传播开去，再没有比吟游歌手更适合的了。
In the rear of the hall, Bronn lounged beneath a pillar. The freerider’s black eyes were fixed on Tyrion, and his hand lay lightly on the pommel of his sword. Tyrion gave him a long look, wondering …
大厅后方，波隆慵懒地躺卧在一根柱子下。这名流浪武士的黑眼睛盯着提利昂，手轻轻地搁在剑柄上。提利昂意味深长地看着他，心里盘算……
Catelyn Stark spoke first. “You wish to confess your crimes, we are told.”
凯特琳·史塔克率先启齿：“听说你有意公开认罪。”
“I do, my lady,” Tyrion answered.
“是的，夫人。”提利昂回答。
Lysa Arryn smiled at her sister. “The sky cells always break them. The gods can see them there, and there is no darkness to hide in.”
莱莎·艾林朝她姐姐微笑。“天牢可以让任何人屈服。在天牢里，天上诸神看得一清二楚，没有暗处可供躲藏。”
“He does not look broken to me,” Lady Catelyn said.
“可他看起来并不像屈服的样子。”凯特琳夫人道。
Lady Lysa paid her no mind. “Say what you will,” she commanded Tyrion.
莱莎夫人没理睬她。“你说吧。”她命令提利昂。
And now to roll the dice , he thought with another quick glance back at Bronn. “Where to begin? I am a vile little man, I confess it. My crimes and sins are beyond counting, my lords and ladies. I have lain with whores, not once but hundreds of times. I have wished my own lord father dead, and my sister, our gracious queen, as well.” Behind him, someone chuckled. “I have not always treated my servants with kindness. I have gambled. I have even cheated, I blush to admit. I have said many cruel and malicious things about the noble lords and ladies of the court.” That drew outright laughter. “Once I—”
孤注一掷的时候到了，他一边想，一边回头看了波隆一眼。“该从何说起呢？我承认我是个小坏蛋。各位老爷夫人，我犯下的罪过数不胜数。我跟婊子睡过，不是一回而是好几百回。我曾暗自希望我父亲大人去死，也对我姐姐，亦即咱们美丽温柔的王后陛下，有过相同的念头。”身后传来轻笑，“我有时候对下人们不太好。我赌过钱，更教我脸红的是，我还耍老千。我说过许多关于朝廷里高贵的老爷夫人们的坏话，开过他们许多下流玩笑。”此话一出，众人哄堂大笑。“有次我——”
“Silence!” Lysa Arryn’s pale round face had turned a burning pink. “What do you imagine you are doing, dwarf?”
“住嘴！”莱莎·艾林苍白的圆脸气得通红。“侏儒，你以为你在干什么？”
Tyrion cocked his head to one side. “Why, confessing my crimes, my lady.”
提利昂歪头：“唉，我在认罪啊，夫人。”
Catelyn Stark took a step forward. “You are accused of sending a hired knife to slay my son Bran in his bed, and of conspiring to murder Lord Jon Arryn, the Hand of the King.”
凯特琳·史塔克向前一步。“你被控派人行刺我卧病在床的儿子布兰，以及密谋害死国王的首相，琼恩·艾林大人。”
Tyrion gave a helpless shrug. “Those crimes I cannot confess, I fear. I know nothing of any murders.”
提利昂爱莫能助地耸耸肩。“恐怕我没办法承认这些罪名。我对杀人可是一窍不通。”
Lady Lysa rose from her weirwood throne. “I will not be made mock of. You have had your little jape, Imp. I trust you enjoyed it. Ser Vardis, take him back to the dungeon … but this time find him a smaller cell, with a floor more sharply sloped.”
莱莎夫人霍地从鱼梁木王座上站起。“你别想寻我开心。小恶魔，你闹也闹够了，想必你玩得很愉快。瓦狄斯爵士，带他回地牢……这次找个房间更小，地板更斜的给他。”
“Is this how justice is done in the Vale?” Tyrion roared, so loudly that Ser Vardis froze for an instant. “Does honor stop at the Bloody Gate? You accuse me of crimes, I deny them, so you throw me into an open cell to freeze and starve.” He lifted his head, to give them all a good look at the bruises Mord had left on his face. “Where is the king’s justice? Is the Eyrie not part of the Seven Kingdoms? I stand accused, you say. Very well. I demand a trial! Let me speak, and let my truth or falsehood be judged openly, in the sight of gods and men.”
“艾林谷里到底还有没有天理？”提利昂大声怒吼，连瓦狄斯爵士都愣了一下。“难道说血门之内就连一点荣誉都没有了？你控告，我否认，你就把我扔进天牢挨饿受冻。”他抬起头，让众人清楚地看见莫德在他脸上留下的伤痕。“请问国王的正义到哪里去了？你说有人告我有罪，那好，我要求公平审判！让我有机会为自己辩护，让天上诸神和地上人民来决定我说话的真伪。”
A low murmuring filled the High Hall. He had her, Tyrion knew. He was highborn, the son of the most powerful lord in the realm, the brother of the queen. He could not be denied a trial. Guardsmen in sky-blue cloaks had started toward Tyrion, but Ser Vardis bid them halt and looked to Lady Lysa.
大厅里四处都在窃窃私语。提利昂知道自己逮着她了。他出身既高，是全国最权势的贵族之子，更是当今王后的弟弟。无论如何，没有人能拒绝他的审判要求。几个穿天蓝色披风的卫兵朝提利昂走去，但瓦狄斯爵士示意他们停手，回头看着莱莎夫人。
Her small mouth twitched in a petulant smile. “If you are tried and found to be guilty of the crimes for which you stand accused, then by the king’s own laws, you must pay with your life’s blood. We keep no headsman in the Eyrie, my lord of Lannister. Open the Moon Door.”
她的小嘴浮现一丝微笑。“要是审判结果证明你的确有罪，那么依照国王的律法，你只有死路一条。不过呢，兰尼斯特大人，在鹰巢城里我们可没有刽子手。打开月门！”
The press of spectators parted. A narrow weirwood door stood between two slender marble pillars, a crescent moon carved in the white wood. Those standing closest edged backward as a pair of guardsmen marched through. One man removed the heavy bronze bars; the second pulled the door inward. Their blue cloaks rose snapping from their shoulders, caught in the sudden gust of wind that came howling through the open door. Beyond was the emptiness of the night sky, speckled with cold uncaring stars.
围观人群向两边退开。只见两根纤细的大理石柱中间有扇狭窄的鱼梁木门，上面用白木雕着新月的形状。两个卫兵大跨步走过去，靠近门边的人赶忙向后退。其中一个卫兵搬开沉重的青铜门闩，另一个则把门向内拉开。两人的蓝披风立时被狂啸而进的强风吹得飞上肩头，啪啪作响。门外，缀满了冰冷的无情繁星，是一片虚无夜空。
“Behold the king’s justice,” Lysa Arryn said. Torch flames fluttered like pennons along the walls, and here and there the odd torch guttered out.
“依照国王的律法，我们举行审判。”莱莎·艾林道。沿着墙壁，无数的火炬如旌旗般猎猎晃动，被风吹熄的火把此起彼落。
“Lysa, I think this unwise,” Catelyn Stark said as the black wind swirled around the hall.
“莱莎，我认为这是不智之举。”凯特琳·史塔克道。黑风在大厅内翻腾。
Her sister ignored her. “You want a trial, my lord of Lannister. Very well, a trial you shall have. My son will listen to whatever you care to say, and you shall hear his judgment. Then you may leave … by one door or the other.”
她妹妹没有理会。“兰尼斯特大人，您要审判，那好，就让您接受审判。你想说什么，我儿子都会倾听，接着你将接受他的判决。然后呢……你要么走大门，不然就从这个门出去。”
She looked so pleased with herself, Tyrion thought, and small wonder. How could a trial threaten her, when her weakling son was the lord judge? Tyrion glanced at her Moon Door. Mother, I want to see him fly! the boy had said. How many men had the snot-nosed little wretch sent through that door already?
她看来好生得意，提利昂心想。这也难怪，既然审判是由她那体弱多病的儿子主持，哪还能忤她的意？提利昂瞟了瞟那个月门。妈咪，我想看他飞！那小鬼是这么说的。这鼻涕都擦不干净的毛头小子，到底送了多少人从那门出去？
“I thank you, my good lady, but I see no need to trouble Lord Robert,” Tyrion said politely. “The gods know the truth of my innocence. I will have their verdict, not the judgment of men. I demand trial by combat.”
“亲爱的夫人，非常感谢您的美意，但我觉得无需惊动劳勃大人。”提利昂有礼地说：“天上诸神会还我清白，我愿让他们做出裁判，非经世人之手。我要求比武审判。”
A storm of sudden laughter filled the High Hall of the Arryns. Lord Nestor Royce snorted, Ser Willis chuckled, Ser Lyn Corbray guffawed, and others threw back their heads and howled until tears ran down their faces. Marillion clumsily plucked a gay note on his new woodharp with the fingers of his broken hand. Even the wind seemed to whistle with derision as it came skirling through the Moon Door.
艾林家的大厅里响起如雷般的笑声。奈斯特·罗伊斯男爵嗤之以鼻，维里爵士呵呵直乐，林恩·科布瑞爵士捧腹大笑，其他人则是笑得前仰后合，涕泪横流。马瑞里安笨拙地伸出断了指头的那只手，在新竖琴上拨下一个愉悦的音符。就连从月门外呼啸而进的狂风，听起来也充满嘲弄之意。
Lysa Arryn’s watery blue eyes looked uncertain. He had caught her off balance. “You have that right, to be sure.”
只有莱莎·艾林水汪汪的蓝眼睛里充满了疑惑，显然他再度让她大感意外。“你当然有这个权利。”
The young knight with the green viper embroidered on his surcoat stepped forward and went to one knee. “My lady, I beg the boon of championing your cause.”
外衣上绣了绿色毒蛇的那个年轻骑士，此时跨步向前，单膝跪下道：“夫人，求您恩准我为您而战。”
“The honor should be mine,” old Lord Hunter said. “For the love I bore your lord husband, let me avenge his death.”
“这份荣幸应该归我所有，”老杭特伯爵说，“看在我对您夫君敬爱有加的份上，让我替他报仇罢。”
“My father served Lord Jon faithfully as High Steward of the Vale,” Ser Albar Royce boomed. “Let me serve his son in this.”
“我父亲忠心耿耿地服侍琼恩大人，为其担任峡谷大总管之职。”艾尔拔·罗伊斯朗声道，“请让我为他的儿子而战。”
“The gods favor the man with the just cause,” said Ser Lyn Corbray, “yet often that turns out to be the man with the surest sword. We all know who that is.” He smiled modestly.
“凡是立场纯正的人，诸神必定加以眷顾，”林恩·科布瑞爵士说，“这样的人也是最好的剑客。而我们都知道这个人是谁。”他谦虚地笑笑。
A dozen other men all spoke at once, clamoring to be heard. Tyrion found it disheartening to realize so many strangers were eager to kill him. Perhaps this had not been such a clever plan after all.
十来个人同声发话，抢着想压过别人。见到这么多人迫不及待想取他性命，提利昂深感沮丧。或许到头来，这主意并不如原先预期的那么聪明。
Lady Lysa raised a hand for silence. “I thank you, my lords, as I know my son would thank you if he were among us. No men in the Seven Kingdoms are as bold and true as the knights of the Vale. Would that I could grant you all this honor. Yet I can choose only one.” She gestured. “Ser Vardis Egen, you were ever my lord husband’s good right hand. You shall be our champion.”
莱莎夫人举手示意众人静声。“诸位大人，我衷心地感谢你们，相信我儿若是在场，也同样会深怀感激。放眼七国全境，无人可比咱们峡谷骑士的忠诚勇武。如果我能让诸位都拥有这份荣耀，不知该有多好。可惜我只能选出一个。”她做出手势。“瓦狄斯·伊根爵士，您向来是我丈夫倚重的左右手。请您担任我的代理骑士。”
Ser Vardis had been singularly silent. “My lady,” he said gravely, sinking to one knee, “pray give this burden to another, I have no taste for it. The man is no warrior. Look at him. A dwarf, half my size and lame in the legs. It would be shameful to slaughter such a man and call it justice.”
瓦狄斯爵士一直保持着沉默。“夫人，”他屈膝跪下，口气凝重地说，“还请将此重担交付他人，我实在无心出战。此人并非武士，看看他，侏儒一个，只有我一半高，又瘸了腿，宰杀这种人，还叫主持正义，那太可耻了。”
Oh, excellent , Tyrion thought. “I agree.”
喔，太棒了，提利昂心想。“我同意。”
Lysa glared at him. “You demanded a trial by combat.”
莱莎怒视着他。“要求比武裁判的也是你。”
“And now I demand a champion, such as you have chosen for yourself. My brother Jaime will gladly take my part, I know.”
“这会儿我还要像你一样，给自己找个代理骑士。就我所知嘛，我老哥詹姆会很乐意替我出战。”
“Your precious Kingslayer is hundreds of leagues from here,” snapped Lysa Arryn.
“你伟大的弑君者离此有几百里格。”莱莎·艾林斥道。
“Send a bird for him. I will gladly await his arrival.”
“派只鸟把他找来。我很乐意等他。”
“You will face Ser Vardis on the morrow.”
“你明天就得跟瓦狄斯爵士决斗。”
“Singer,” Tyrion said, turning to Marillion, “when you make a ballad of this, be certain you tell them how Lady Arryn denied the dwarf the right to a champion, and sent him forth lame and bruised and hobbling to face her finest knight.”
“唱歌的，”提利昂转身对马瑞里安说，“等你把这事编成曲子，别忘了说艾林夫人是怎样不准侏儒找代理骑士，逼他一瘸一拐，浑身是伤地去对付她手下最优秀的骑士。”
“I deny you nothing!” Lysa Arryn said, her voice peeved and shrill with irritation. “Name your champion, Imp … if you think you can find a man to die for you.”
“我哪有不准？”莱莎·艾林道。她语气尖锐，显然恼怒已极。“小恶魔，有本事你就挑个代理骑士啊……如果你认为有人会愿意为你送命的话。”
“If it is all the same to you, I’d sooner find one to kill for me.” Tyrion looked over the long hall. No one moved. For a long moment he wondered if it had all been a colossal blunder.
“说实话，我是找个人来替我杀人。”提利昂扫视长厅。无人动作。过了好长一段时间，他不禁怀疑这是不是个天大的错误。
Then there was a stirring in the rear of the chamber. “I’ll stand for the dwarf,” Bronn called out.
接着，大厅后面起了阵骚动。“我帮侏儒上场吧，”波隆叫道。
*EDDARD
第四十章 艾德
H e dreamt an old dream, of three knights in white cloaks, and a tower long fallen, and Lyanna in her bed of blood.
他再度梦见那三位雪白披风的骑士，那座倾塌已久的塔楼，以及躺卧血床的莱安娜。
In the dream his friends rode with him, as they had in life. Proud Martyn Cassel, Jory’s father; faithful Theo Wull; Ethan Glover, who had been Brandon’s squire; Ser Mark Ryswell, soft of speech and gentle of heart; the crannogman, Howland Reed; Lord Dustin on his great red stallion. Ned had known their faces as well as he knew his own once, but the years leech at a man’s memories, even those he has vowed never to forget. In the dream they were only shadows, grey wraiths on horses made of mist.
在梦中他与从前的战友并肩而行：骄傲的马丁·凯索、乔里的父亲，忠心耿耿的席奥·渥尔本为布兰登侍从的伊森·葛洛佛，还有轻声细语、心地善良的马克·莱斯威尔爵士，泽地人霍兰·黎德，以及骑着红色骏马的达斯丁伯爵。他们的面容，对奈德来说，曾如自己的脸庞一般熟悉，但岁月仿如水蛭，渐渐吸走了人们的记忆，即使是他一度发誓绝不忘记的部分也不例外。在梦里他们只剩幻影，宛如灰色的幽灵，骑在浓雾聚成的马上。
They were seven, facing three. In the dream as it had been in life. Yet these were no ordinary three. They waited before the round tower, the red mountains of Dorne at their backs, their white cloaks blowing in the wind. And these were no shadows; their faces burned clear, even now. Ser Arthur Dayne, the Sword of the Morning, had a sad smile on his lips. The hilt of the greatsword Dawn poked up over his right shoulder. Ser Oswell Whent was on one knee, sharpening his blade with a whetstone. Across his white-enameled helm, the black bat of his House spread its wings. Between them stood fierce old Ser Gerold Hightower, the White Bull, Lord Commander of the Kingsguard.
他们一行七人，对方则是三个。梦中如此，当年亦然。但这三人绝非平庸之辈。他们静待于圆形的高塔前，身后是多恩的赤红峰峦，肩上的雪白披风在风中飘荡。而这三人并非幻影，他们的面容深深烙印，至今依旧清晰。“拂晓神剑”亚瑟·戴恩爵士嘴角挂着一抹哀伤的微笑，巨剑“黎明”斜出右肩。奥斯威尔·河安爵士单膝跪地，正拿着磨刀石霍霍磨剑。他那顶白色瓷釉的头盔上，有着象征家徽的展翅黑蝙蝠。站在两人之间的是年迈的御林铁卫队长杰洛·海塔尔爵士，外号“白牛”。
“I looked for you on the Trident,” Ned said to them.
“我在三叉戟河上没见到你们。”奈德对他们说。
“We were not there,” Ser Gerold answered.
“我们不在那里。”杰洛爵士回答。
“Woe to the Usurper if we had been,” said Ser Oswell.
“我们在的话，篡夺者就要倒霉了。”奥斯威尔爵士道。
“When King’s Landing fell, Ser Jaime slew your king with a golden sword, and I wondered where you were.”
“君临城陷之时，詹姆爵士用他的黄金宝剑杀了你们的国王，你们也没出现。”
“Far away,” Ser Gerold said, “or Aerys would yet sit the Iron Throne, and our false brother would burn in seven hells.”
“我们身在远方。”杰洛爵士道，“否则伊里斯还会好端端地坐在铁王座上，而我们虚伪的弟兄则会下七层地狱。”
“I came down on Storm’s End to lift the siege,” Ned told them, “and the Lords Tyrell and Redwyne dipped their banners, and all their knights bent the knee to pledge us fealty. I was certain you would be among them.”
“我解了风息堡之围，”奈德告诉他们，“提利尔和雷德温大人俯首称臣，他们麾下的骑士也都下跪效忠。我本以为你们一定会在其中。”
“Our knees do not bend easily,” said Ser Arthur Dayne.
“我们不轻易下跪。”亚瑟·戴恩爵士道。
“Ser Willem Darry is fled to Dragonstone, with your queen and Prince Viserys. I thought you might have sailed with him.”
“威廉·戴瑞爵士带着你们的王后和韦赛里斯王子，往龙石岛逃去。我猜想你们可能也在船上。”
“Ser Willem is a good man and true,” said Ser Oswell.
“威廉爵士忠勇可嘉。”奥斯威尔爵士说。
“But not of the Kingsguard,” Ser Gerold pointed out. “The Kingsguard does not flee.”
“但他并非御林铁卫，”杰洛爵士指出，“御林铁卫绝不临危脱逃。”
“Then or now,” said Ser Arthur. He donned his helm.
“过去如此，现在亦然。”亚瑟爵士说着戴上头盔。
“We swore a vow,” explained old Ser Gerold.
“我们发过誓。”老杰洛爵士解释。
Ned’s wraiths moved up beside him, with shadow swords in hand. They were seven against three.
奈德的幽灵们与他并肩上前，手握影子宝剑。以七对三。
“And now it begins,” said Ser Arthur Dayne, the Sword of the Morning. He unsheathed Dawn and held it with both hands. The blade was pale as milkglass, alive with light.
“一切就从这里开始吧。”拂晓神剑亚瑟·戴恩爵士道。他抽出黎明，双手高举，剑身苍白好似乳白琉璃，在光线照耀下宛如蕴涵生命。
“No,” Ned said with sadness in his voice. “Now it ends.” As they came together in a rush of steel and shadow, he could hear Lyanna screaming. “Eddard!” she called. A storm of rose petals blew across a blood-streaked sky, as blue as the eyes of death.
“不对，”奈德哀伤地说，“一切将在这里结束。”当钢铁与幻影冲杀成一团，他听见了莱安娜的尖叫。“艾德！”她喊。一阵玫瑰花瓣的暴风，吹过染血长天，天空蓝得像死亡之眼。
“Lord Eddard,” Lyanna called again.
“艾德大人。”莱安娜又叫。
“I promise,” he whispered. “Lya, I promise …”
“我保证，”他轻声说，“莱安，我保证……”
“Lord Eddard,” a man echoed from the dark.
“艾德大人。”有人从暗处也说了这句话。
Groaning, Eddard Stark opened his eyes. Moonlight streamed through the tall windows of the Tower of the Hand.
艾德·史塔克呻吟着睁开眼睛。月光从首相塔的高窗透进来。
“Lord Eddard?” A shadow stood over the bed.
“艾德大人？”床边站了个影子。
“How … how long?” The sheets were tangled, his leg splinted and plastered. A dull throb of pain shot up his side.
“多……多久了？”床单乱成一团，他的腿用夹板固定，打上了石膏，隐隐抽痛。
“Six days and seven nights.” The voice was Vayon Poole’s. The steward held a cup to Ned’s lips. “Drink, my lord.”
“六天七夜。”那是维扬·普尔的声音。总管拿起杯子送到奈德唇边。“老爷，喝吧。”
“What …?”
“这是……？”
“Only water. Maester Pycelle said you would be thirsty.”
“只是开水而已。派席尔大学士说您醒来会渴。”
Ned drank. His lips were parched and cracked. The water tasted sweet as honey.
于是奈德喝了。他的嘴唇干裂，开水如同蜂蜜般甜美。
“The king left orders,” Vayon Poole told him when the cup was empty. “He would speak with you, my lord.”
“国王陛下有令，”杯子见底后，维扬·普尔告诉他。“老爷，他要跟您谈谈。”
“On the morrow,” Ned said. “When I am stronger.” He could not face Robert now. The dream had left him weak as a kitten.
“明天再说，”奈德道，“等我体力好点再说。”这会儿他无法面对劳勃。刚才那个梦吸走了他仅存的力量，让他软弱得像只小猫。
“My lord,” Poole said, “he commanded us to send you to him the moment you opened your eyes.” The steward busied himself lighting a bedside candle.
“老爷，”普尔说，“陛下他要我们等您一睁眼，就带您去见他。”总管点起床边的蜡烛。
Ned cursed softly. Robert was never known for his patience. “Tell him I’m too weak to come to him. If he wishes to speak with me, I should be pleased to receive him here. I hope you wake him from a sound sleep. And summon …” He was about to say Jory when he remembered. “Summon the captain of my guard.”
奈德轻声咒骂。劳勃向来很没耐性。“跟他说我还太虚弱，没办法过去。如果他坚持要跟我谈谈，我很愿意在床上接待他。我希望你别把他从美梦中吵醒。顺便……”他正要说“乔里”，却想了起来。“把我的侍卫队长找来。”
Alyn stepped into the bedchamber a few moments after the steward had taken his leave. “My lord.”
总管离开后没几分钟，埃林走进他的卧房。“大人。”
“Poole tells me it has been six days,” Ned said. “I must know how things stand.”
“普尔说我睡了六天。”奈德道，“我要知道现在局势如何。”
“The Kingslayer is fled the city,” Alyn told him. “The talk is he’s ridden back to Casterly Rock to join his father. The story of how Lady Catelyn took the Imp is on every lip. I have put on extra guards, if it please you.”
“弑君者跑了。”埃林告诉他，“传说是逃回凯岩城和他父亲会合。凯特琳夫人逮捕小恶魔的事，已经传遍大街小巷，所以我加派了守卫，希望您不介意。”
“It does,” Ned assured him. “My daughters?”
“你做得很好。”奈德赞许道。“我的女儿们呢？”
“They have been with you every day, my lord. Sansa prays quietly, but Arya …” He hesitated. “She has not said a word since they brought you back. She is a fierce little thing, my lord. I have never seen such anger in a girl.”
“大人，她们每天都陪着您。珊莎静静地为您祷告，可艾莉亚……”他迟疑了一下。“自他们把您带回来后，她就没说过半个字。大人，她性子很烈，我从没见哪个小女孩这么生气过。”
“Whatever happens,” Ned said, “I want my daughters kept safe. I fear this is only the beginning.”
“无论如何，”奈德道，“我希望我女儿们平安无事。恐怕麻烦才刚开始。”
“No harm will come to them, Lord Eddard,” Alyn said. “I stake my life on that.”
“艾德大人，她们不会有事的。”埃林道，“我拿性命担保。”
“Jory and the others …”
“乔里他们……”
“I gave them over to the silent sisters, to be sent north to Winterfell. Jory would want to lie beside his grandfather.”
“我把他们交给了静默修女会的姐妹，准备送回临冬城去。应该让乔里葬在他祖父身边。”
It would have to be his grandfather, for Jory’s father was buried far to the south. Martyn Cassel had perished with the rest. Ned had pulled the tower down afterward, and used its bloody stones to build eight cairns upon the ridge. It was said that Rhaegar had named that place the tower of joy, but for Ned it was a bitter memory. They had been seven against three, yet only two had lived to ride away; Eddard Stark himself and the little crannogman, Howland Reed. He did not think it omened well that he should dream that dream again after so many years.
他只能与祖父葬在一块，因为乔里的父亲葬在遥远的南方。马丁·凯索和其他人一样命丧南疆，战后奈德拆掉高塔，用其血色石砖在山脊上筑起八座石冢。据说雷加将它命名为极乐塔，但对奈德而言，那里却充满了痛苦的回忆。他们以七对三，却只有艾德·史塔克他自己，和小个子的泽地人霍兰·黎德两人生还。多年以来，这个梦反复出现，实在不是什么好兆头。
“You’ve done well, Alyn,” Ned was saying when Vayon Poole returned. The steward bowed low. “His Grace is without, my lord, and the queen with him.”
“埃林，你做得很好。”奈德正说着，维扬·普尔又回来了。总管深深一鞠躬，“老爷，国王陛下在外面，王后也跟他一起。”
Ned pushed himself up higher, wincing as his leg trembled with pain. He had not expected Cersei to come. It did not bode well that she had. “Send them in, and leave us. What we have to say should not go beyond these walls.” Poole withdrew quietly.
奈德撑着坐起，断腿痛得他咬紧牙关。他没想到瑟曦会来，这也不是好兆头。“请他们进来，然后你们下去罢。我们的谈话内容不能外传。”普尔静静地离开。
Robert had taken time to dress. He wore a black velvet doublet with the crowned stag of Baratheon worked upon the breast in golden thread, and a golden mantle with a cloak of black and gold squares. A flagon of wine was in his hand, his face already flushed from drink. Cersei Lannister entered behind him, a jeweled tiara in her hair.
劳勃还花了点心思打扮。他穿着黑天鹅绒上衣，胸前用金线绣着拜拉席恩家族的宝冠雄鹿，外罩黑金格子披风。他手里拿了瓶葡萄酒，喝得满脸通红。瑟曦·兰尼斯特跟在他身后，头上带着珠宝王冠。
“Your Grace,” Ned said. “Your pardons. I cannot rise.”
“陛下，”奈德道，“请您原谅，恕我无法起身。”
“No matter,” the king said gruffly. “Some wine? From the Arbor. A good vintage.”
“没关系。”国王粗声道，“要不要喝两口？青亭岛的好东西。”
“A small cup,” Ned said. “My head is still heavy from the milk of the poppy.”
“一小杯就好，”奈德说，“我喝了罂粟花奶，头还昏昏沉沉的。”
“A man in your place should count himself fortunate that his head is still on his shoulders,” the queen declared.
“还保得住脑袋，已经算你走运。”王后表示。
“Quiet, woman,” Robert snapped. He brought Ned a cup of wine. “Does the leg still pain you?”
“臭女人，给我安静点。”国王斥道。他端给奈德一杯酒。“脚还痛吗？”
“Some,” Ned said. His head was swimming, but it would not do to admit to weakness in front of the queen.
“还有一点。”奈德说。他虽然头晕目眩，却不愿在王后面前自承虚弱。
“Pycelle swears it will heal clean,” Robert frowned. “I take it you know what Catelyn has done?”
“派席尔保证痊愈以后不会留下疤痕，”劳勃皱眉道，“我想你知道凯特琳干了什么好事吧？”
“I do.” Ned took a small swallow of wine. “My lady wife is blameless, Your Grace. All she did she did at my command.”
“我知道。”奈德啜了一小口酒。“我夫人没有错，陛下。都是我的意思。”
“I am not pleased, Ned,” Robert grumbled.
“奈德，我很不高兴。”劳勃咕哝道。
“By what right do you dare lay hands on my blood?” Cersei demanded. “Who do you think you are?”
“你凭什么对我家人下手？”瑟曦质问，“你以为你什么东西？”
“The Hand of the King,” Ned told her with icy courtesy. “Charged by your own lord husband to keep the king’s peace and enforce the king’s justice.”
“我是御前首相。”奈德有礼但冰冷地回敬，“奉了你丈夫的指令，以国王之名维护和平和公理正义。”
“You were the Hand,” Cersei began, “but now—”
“你曾经是首相，”瑟曦不依不饶，“如今——”
“Silence!” the king roared. “You asked him a question and he answered it.” Cersei subsided, cold with anger, and Robert turned back to Ned. “Keep the king’s peace, you say. Is this how you keep my peace, Ned? Seven men are dead …”
“安静！”国王咆哮道，“你问他问题，他也回答了你。”瑟曦冷冷地退开，满脸怒容。劳勃又转向奈德。“奈德，你说以国王之名维护和平，请问这就是你维护和平的方式么？总共死了七个人……”
“Eight,” the queen corrected. “Tregar died this morning, of the blow Lord Stark gave him.”
“八个，”王后纠正他，“崔格今早上死了，死于史塔克大人那一剑。”
“Abductions on the kingsroad and drunken slaughter in my streets,” the king said. “I will not have it, Ned.”
“先是在国王大道上公然绑架，然后又在城里面喝酒杀人，”国王道，“奈德，我不会容许这种事的。”
“Catelyn had good reason for taking the Imp—”
“凯特琳有充分的理由去抓小恶魔——”
“I said, I will not have it! To hell with her reasons. You will command her to release the dwarf at once, and you will make your peace with Jaime.”
“我说我不容许这种事发生！管她什么理由。我要你命令她立刻释放侏儒，然后跟詹姆和好。”
“Three of my men were butchered before my eyes, because Jaime Lannister wished to chasten me. Am I to forget that?”
“詹姆只因为想‘教训我’，就当着我的面屠杀了我三个部下，而你却叫我当这事没发生过？”
“My brother was not the cause of this quarrel,” Cersei told the king. “Lord Stark was returning drunk from a brothel. His men attacked Jaime and his guards, even as his wife attacked Tyrion on the kingsroad.”
“这场争端可不是我弟弟挑起的，”瑟曦告诉国王，“当时史塔克大人喝醉了酒，刚从妓院里出来。他手下的人攻击詹姆和他的卫士，就像他太太在国王大道上攻击提利昂一样。”
“You know me better than that, Robert,” Ned said. “Ask Lord Baelish if you doubt me. He was there.”
“劳勃，事实是否如此你很清楚。”奈德道，“你可以问问贝里席大人，当时他在现场。”
“I’ve talked to Littlefinger,” Robert said. “He claims he rode off to bring the gold cloaks before the fighting began, but he admits you were returning from some whorehouse.”
“我跟小指头谈过了，”劳勃道，“他说他急忙去找都城守卫队时，你们还没开打，不过他承认你当时的确是从某家妓院回来。”
“Some whorehouse? Damn your eyes, Robert, I went there to have a look at your daughter! Her mother has named her Barra. She looks like that first girl you fathered, when we were boys together in the Vale.” He watched the queen as he spoke; her face was a mask, still and pale, betraying nothing.
“某家妓院？劳勃，你是瞎了眼不成？我到那儿是去看你女儿！她妈给她取了个名字叫芭拉，长得很像我们住在峡谷、都还是小男孩时你那个女儿，你的第一个女儿。”他边说边看王后，可她像是戴着面具，苍白而冷静，不露出任何情绪。
Robert flushed. “Barra,” he grumbled. “Is that supposed to please me? Damn the girl. I thought she had more sense.”
劳勃红了脸。“芭拉，”他喃喃说，“想哄我高兴吗？这小女子真该死，怎么一点常识都没有。”
“She cannot be more than fifteen, and a whore, and you thought she had sense?” Ned said, incredulous. His leg was beginning to pain him sorely. It was hard to keep his temper. “The fool child is in love with you, Robert.”
“她连十五岁都不到，就得出卖肉体，你还期望她有常识？”奈德难以置信地说。他的腿痛得厉害，使他按捺不住怒气。“劳勃，那傻孩子疯狂地爱着你，你知道吗？”
The king glanced at Cersei. “This is no fit subject for the queen’s ears.”
国王瞄了瑟曦一眼。“这些事给王后听见不好。”
“Her Grace will have no liking for anything I have to say,” Ned replied. “I am told the Kingslayer has fled the city. Give me leave to bring him back to justice.”
“只怕不管我说什么，王后陛下都不会爱听。”奈德答道，“我听说弑君者逃出城去了。请你允许我把他抓回来接受法律制裁。”
The king swirled the wine in his cup, brooding. He took a swallow. “No,” he said. “I want no more of this. Jaime slew three of your men, and you five of his. Now it ends.”
国王晃着杯中酒，沉思半晌，最后灌了一大口。“不行，”他说，“这样下去没完没了。詹姆杀了你三个人，你也杀了他五个，算扯平了。”
“Is that your notion of justice?” Ned flared. “If so, I am pleased that I am no longer your Hand.”
“这就是你所谓的正义吗？”奈德怒道，“如果是的话，那我真庆幸没继续当你的首相。”
The queen looked to her husband. “If any man had dared speak to a Targaryen as he has spoken to you—”
王后看看她丈夫。“以前要是有人敢用这种口气对坦格利安家的人说话——”
“Do you take me for Aerys?” Robert interrupted.
“你当我是伊里斯吗？”劳勃打断她的话。
“I took you for a king . Jaime and Tyrion are your own brothers, by all the laws of marriage and the bonds we share. The Starks have driven off the one and seized the other. This man dishonors you with every breath he takes, and yet you stand there meekly, asking if his leg pains him and would he like some wine.”
“我当你是一国之君。论法律论姻亲，詹姆和提利昂都算是你兄弟，如今史塔克家的人赶走一个又抓了另一个，而这个人说的每一句话都在羞辱你，你却只会乖乖站在旁边，一会儿问他腿痛不痛，一会儿问他要不要喝酒。”
Robert’s face was dark with anger. “How many times must I tell you to hold your tongue, woman?”
劳勃脸色阴沉，满面怒容。“臭女人，你要我说几次才会闭嘴？”
Cersei’s face was a study in contempt. “What a jape the gods have made of us two,” she said. “By all rights, you ought to be in skirts and me in mail.”
瑟曦的神情轻蔑得无以复加。“天上诸神还真开了我俩一个大玩笑，”她说，“你应该穿裙子当女人，像个男人披挂上阵的该是我。”
Purple with rage, the king lashed out, a vicious backhand blow to the side of the head. She stumbled against the table and fell hard, yet Cersei Lannister did not cry out. Her slender fingers brushed her cheek, where the pale smooth skin was already reddening. On the morrow the bruise would cover half her face. “I shall wear this as a badge of honor,” she announced.
国王气得脸色发紫，伸手就是狠狠一拳，把她打得踉跄着撞上桌子，重重跌倒在地。瑟曦·兰尼斯特没吭半声，她伸出纤细的手指抚着脸，面颊光滑的雪白肌肤已经开始泛红，等到明天，半边脸就会肿起来。“我会把这当成荣誉的奖章。”她宣示。
“Wear it in silence, or I’ll honor you again,” Robert vowed. He shouted for a guard. Ser Meryn Trant stepped into the room, tall and somber in his white armor. “The queen is tired. See her to her bedchamber.” The knight helped Cersei to her feet and led her out without a word.
“那就给我安静地戴好，否则我让你更光荣。”劳勃保证。他大喊来人，穿着白色铠甲，高大阴沉的马林·特兰爵士走进屋内。“王后累了。送她回房。”骑士扶起瑟曦，一言不发地领她出去了。
Robert reached for the flagon and refilled his cup. “You see what she does to me, Ned.” The king seated himself, cradling his wine cup. “My loving wife. The mother of my children.” The rage was gone from him now; in his eyes Ned saw something sad and scared. “I should not have hit her. That was not … that was not kingly.” He stared down at his hands, as if he did not quite know what they were. “I was always strong … no one could stand before me, no one. How do you fight someone if you can’t hit them?” Confused, the king shook his head. “Rhaegar … Rhaegar won , damn him. I killed him, Ned, I drove the spike right through that black armor into his black heart, and he died at my feet. They made up songs about it. Yet somehow he still won. He has Lyanna now, and I have her.” The king drained his cup.
劳勃又拿起酒瓶，为自己斟满。“奈德，你也看到她是如何待我的了。”国王坐下来，抚着酒杯。“这就是我亲爱的妻子，我孩子的母亲。”他怒气已消，此刻奈德在他眼里所见只有哀伤和恐惧。“我不该打她的。这实在不是……实在不是国王该有的举动。”他低头盯着自己的手，仿佛不太明白那是什么东西。“我的力气向来很大……没人能打赢我，没有人。可万一你碰不到他，这场架又该怎么打？”国王困惑地摇摇头。“雷加……雷加他赢了，挨千刀的。奈德，我杀了他，我的战锤狠狠凿穿他那件黑铠甲，刺进他那颗黑心，教他当场死在我脚下。后人为这件事称颂不已。可他还是赢了。如今他拥有莱安娜，而我得到的却是她。”国王一饮而尽。
“Your Grace,” Ned Stark said, “we must talk …”
“陛下，”奈德·史塔克道，“我有事要跟您谈……”
Robert pressed his fingertips against his temples. “I am sick unto death of talk. On the morrow I’m going to the kingswood to hunt. Whatever you have to say can wait until I return.”
劳勃伸出手指按住太阳穴。“我已经谈到反胃了。明天我要去御林打猎，你等我回来再说罢。”
“If the gods are good, I shall not be here on your return. You commanded me to return to Winterfell, remember?”
“若是诸神眷顾，等您回来我就不在了。您命令我返回临冬城，记得吗？”
Robert stood up, grasping one of the bedposts to steady himself. “The gods are seldom good, Ned. Here, this is yours.” He pulled the heavy silver hand clasp from a pocket in the lining of his cloak and tossed it on the bed. “Like it or not, you are my Hand, damn you. I forbid you to leave.”
劳勃站起来，握着床柱稳住身子。“奈德，诸神很少眷顾世人的。拿去罢，这是你的东西。”他从斗篷内袋里拿出沉重的手形银徽章，丢在床上。“管你喜不喜欢，总之你他妈是我的首相。我不准你走。”
Ned picked up the silver clasp. He was being given no choice, it seemed. His leg throbbed, and he felt as helpless as a child. “The Targaryen girl—”
奈德拾起银胸针。看来他别无选择。他脚伤抽痛，觉得自己无助得像个孩子。“坦格利安家那女孩——”
The king groaned. “Seven hells, don’t start with her again. That’s done, I’ll hear no more of it.”
国王一声呻吟，“七层地狱啊，你还提她干嘛？那件事算完了，我不想再谈。”
“Why would you want me as your Hand, if you refuse to listen to my counsel?”
“若你不愿听我忠告，还要我这个首相做什么？”
“Why?” Robert laughed. “Why not? Someone has to rule this damnable kingdom. Put on the badge, Ned. It suits you. And if you ever throw it in my face again, I swear to you, I’ll pin the damned thing on Jaime Lannister.”
“做什么？”劳勃大笑，“这烂国家总得有人管。奈德，把徽章戴起来。我跟你发誓，你要是敢再丢还给我，我就亲自把这烂东西配在詹姆·兰尼斯特身上。”
*CATELYN
第四十一章 凯特琳
T he eastern sky was rose and gold as the sun broke over the Vale of Arryn. Catelyn Stark watched the light spread, her hands resting on the delicate carved stone of the balustrade outside her window. Below her the world turned from black to indigo to green as dawn crept across fields and forests. Pale white mists rose off Alyssa’s Tears, where the ghost waters plunged over the shoulder of the mountain to begin their long tumble down the face of the Giant’s Lance. Catelyn could feel the faint touch of spray on her face.
艾林谷的日出，将东方的天空染成玫瑰和金黄。凯特琳·史塔克双手搁在窗外雕饰华丽的栏杆上，凝望着逐渐散溢的光辉。黎明爬过田野和森林，世界在她脚下由漆黑转为靛青，再变成茵绿。幽魂般的水冲出山脊，开始它们腾涌直落巨人之枪的漫长旅程，阿莱莎之泪上白雾激荡。凯特琳隐约可以感觉水花溅到脸上。
Alyssa Arryn had seen her husband, her brothers, and all her children slain, and yet in life she had never shed a tear. So in death, the gods had decreed that she would know no rest until her weeping watered the black earth of the Vale, where the men she had loved were buried. Alyssa had been dead six thousand years now, and still no drop of the torrent had ever reached the valley floor far below. Catelyn wondered how large a waterfall her own tears would make when she died. “Tell me the rest of it,” she said.
阿莱莎·艾林生前眼睁睁地见到丈夫、兄弟和儿女惨遭杀害，却从未掉过一滴眼泪。于是诸神谕令，死后她将泪流不止，直到流下的泪水浇灌至峡谷平原的黑色沃野，因为她所爱的人们都葬在那里。阿莱莎已经死了六千年，然而至今没有一滴河水流到谷底。凯特琳不禁揣测，等自己死后，她的泪水又会变成多大的瀑布。“还有什么消息？”她说。
“The Kingslayer is massing a host at Casterly Rock,” Ser Rodrik Cassel answered from the room behind her. “Your brother writes that he has sent riders to the Rock, demanding that Lord Tywin proclaim his intent, but he has had no answer. Edmure has commanded Lord Vance and Lord Piper to guard the pass below the Golden Tooth. He vows to you that he will yield no foot of Tully land without first watering it with Lannister blood.”
“弑君者正在凯岩城集结军队，”身后的房间里，罗德利克爵士回答，“您哥哥信上说他派人去凯岩城，要求泰温大人表明意图，但至今没有回应。艾德慕已命凡斯大人和派柏大人把守金牙城下的隘口，并向您发誓，他决不放弃徒利家族的每一寸土地，若兰尼斯特敢来进犯，就用他们的血来浇灌。”
Catelyn turned away from the sunrise. Its beauty did little to lighten her mood; it seemed cruel for a day to dawn so fair and end so foul as this one promised to. “Edmure has sent riders and made vows,” she said, “but Edmure is not the Lord of Riverrun. What of my lord father?”
凯特琳移开视线，不再观看日出。朝阳再美，也难以振奋她的心绪。想到一日之始如此美丽，却注定将以惨剧收场，她愈发感慨造物者的残酷。“艾德慕派了人也发了誓，”她说：“但他不是奔流城公爵。我父亲大人有消息吗？”
“The message made no mention of Lord Hoster, my lady.” Ser Rodrik tugged at his whiskers. They had grown in white as snow and bristly as a thornbush while he was recovering from his wounds; he looked almost himself again.
“夫人，信上没提到霍斯特大人。”罗德利克爵士捻捻胡须。他养伤期间，胡子又重新色白如雪，林立如丛。现在的他，模样与从前几无二致了。
“My father would not have given the defense of Riverrun over to Edmure unless he was very sick,” she said, worried. “I should have been woken as soon as this bird arrived.”
“父亲若非病重，决不会把奔流的防务交给艾德慕。”她忧心忡忡地说，“鸟儿捎信来的时候，你应该立刻叫醒我才对。”
“Your lady sister thought it better to let you sleep, Maester Colemon told me.”
“柯蒙学士告诉我，您妹妹想让您好好休息。”
“I should have been woken,” she insisted.
“应该叫醒我。”她坚持。
“The maester tells me your sister planned to speak with you after the combat,” Ser Rodrik said.
“学士他还说，您妹妹准备在比武之后再和您谈谈。”
“Then she still plans to go through with this mummer’s farce?” Catelyn grimaced. “The dwarf has played her like a set of pipes, and she is too deaf to hear the tune. Whatever happens this morning, Ser Rodrik, it is past time we took our leave. My place is at Winterfell with my sons. If you are strong enough to travel, I shall ask Lysa for an escort to see us to Gulltown. We can take ship from there.”
“这么说来，她真打算把这出闹剧演下去？”凯特琳皱眉。“那侏儒拿她当笛子吹，她自己还蒙在鼓里。罗德利克爵士，无论今天早上结果如何，我们都该动身。我的职责是在临冬城陪伴儿子们。假如你体力还撑得住，我这就请莱莎派人护送我们到海鸥镇，我们从那里搭船回去。”
“Another ship?” Ser Rodrik looked a shade green, yet he managed not to shudder. “As you say, my lady.”
“又要坐船？”罗德利克脸色发青，但还是忍耐住没有发抖。“夫人，就照您吩咐。”
The old knight waited outside her door as Catelyn summoned the servants Lysa had given her. If she spoke to her sister before the duel, perhaps she could change her mind, she thought as they dressed her. Lysa’s policies varied with her moods, and her moods changed hourly. The shy girl she had known at Riverrun had grown into a woman who was by turns proud, fearful, cruel, dreamy, reckless, timid, stubborn, vain, and, above all, inconstant .
凯特琳唤来莱莎派给她差遣的仆人，老骑士则候在门外。她一边更衣，一边想着如果赶在决斗开始前与妹妹谈谈，或许能让她改变心意。莱莎行事全依心情而定，偏偏她的个性又阴晴不定。她所认识的，昔日奔流城那位羞怯少女，已经长成了时而傲慢，时而忧惧，又或残忍，甚至空幻不切实际，粗心大意、怯懦怕事、好大喜功的妇人，最糟糕的是她还变化无常。
When that vile turnkey of hers had come crawling to tell them that Tyrion Lannister wished to confess, Catelyn had urged Lysa to have the dwarf brought to them privately, but no, nothing would do but that her sister must make a show of him before half the Vale. And now this …
当初她那阴狠的狱吏连走带爬，跑来告诉她们提利昂·兰尼斯特有意认罪，凯特琳便力劝莱莎私下会审侏儒，然而妹妹非得在峡谷贵族面前大肆炫耀一番不可，结果竟演变至此……
“Lannister is my prisoner,” she told Ser Rodrik as they descended the tower stairs and made their way through the Eyrie’s cold white halls. Catelyn wore plain grey wool with a silvered belt. “My sister must be reminded of that.”
“兰尼斯特是我的犯人，”他们步上高塔楼梯，朝鹰巢城冰冷苍白的大厅走去时，她这么对罗德利克爵士说。凯特琳穿了一件朴素的灰羊毛外衣，系上一条镀银的腰带。“我妹妹不能忘记这点。”
At the doors to Lysa’s apartments, they met her uncle storming out. “Going to join the fool’s festival?” Ser Brynden snapped. “I’d tell you to slap some sense into your sister, if I thought it would do any good, but you’d only bruise your hand.”
他们在莱莎居所外遇见叔叔怒气冲冲地冲出来。“这群傻瓜过节呢，你也去干嘛？”布林登爵士斥道，“本来我想叫你甩你妹妹两个耳光，把她打清醒，可这没用，你只会打痛自己的手。”
“There was a bird from Riverrun,” Catelyn began, “a letter from Edmure …”
“有只鸟儿从奔流城过来，”凯特琳开口，“艾德慕写信……”
“I know, child.” The black fish that fastened his cloak was Brynden’s only concession to ornament. “I had to hear it from Maester Colemon. I asked your sister for leave to take a thousand seasoned men and ride for Riverrun with all haste. Do you know what she told me? The Vale cannot spare a thousand swords, nor even one, Uncle , she said. You are the Knight of the Gate. Your place is here.” A gust of childish laughter drifted through the open doors behind him, and her uncle glanced darkly over his shoulder. “Well, I told her she could bloody well find herself a new Knight of the Gate. Black fish or no, I am still a Tully. I shall leave for Riverrun by evenfall.”
“孩子，我知道，”布林登斗篷上的黑鱼，是他全身上下惟一称得上装饰的东西。“我从柯蒙师傅那儿听到了消息。我请你妹妹拨给我一千精兵，火速驰援奔流城，结果你知道她说了些什么？她说“叔叔，鹰巢城的守军少不了一个，更别提一千，再说你是血门骑士，理应留守于此。”他身后敞开的大门内传出一阵充满稚气的笑声，叔叔沉着脸回头看了一眼。“好吧，反正我告诉她大可再找个新的血门骑士。无论我是不是黑鱼，我到底是徒利家的人。今天傍晚我就回奔流城。”
Catelyn could not pretend to surprise. “Alone? You know as well as I that you will never survive the high road. Ser Rodrik and I are returning to Winterfell. Come with us, Uncle. I will give you your thousand men. Riverrun will not fight alone.”
凯特琳难掩惊讶之情。“就你一个人？你我都很清楚一个人走山路根本是找死。正好罗德利克爵士和我也准备回临冬城去。叔叔，跟我们一道走罢，那一千精兵我来给。奔流城绝不会孤军作战。”
Brynden thought a moment, then nodded a brusque agreement. “As you say. It’s the long way home, but I’m more like to get there. I’ll wait for you below.” He went striding off, his cloak swirling behind him.
布林登沉吟半晌，然后唐突地点点头。“那就这样。虽然是绕远路，但我抵达的机会却也比较大。我在下面等你。”说完他大跨步离去，披风在背后飘荡。
Catelyn exchanged a look with Ser Rodrik. They went through the doors to the high, nervous sound of a child’s giggles.
凯特琳与罗德利克爵士交换了个眼色，接着穿过大门，朝那一片高亢尖锐，却又焦虑不安的孩童嘻笑声走去。
Lysa’s apartments opened over a small garden, a circle of dirt and grass planted with blue flowers and ringed on all sides by tall white towers. The builders had intended it as a godswood, but the Eyrie rested on the hard stone of the mountain, and no matter how much soil was hauled up from the Vale, they could not get a weirwood to take root here. So the Lords of the Eyrie planted grass and scattered statuary amidst low, flowering shrubs. It was there the two champions would meet to place their lives, and that of Tyrion Lannister, into the hands of the gods.
莱莎的居所位于一座小花园之上，花园呈圆圈状，白色高塔环绕四周。花园的泥土和青草上种植着蓝色花朵，当初工匠的原意是要栽培神木林，然而鹰巢城立基于山巅坚硬的磐石之上，无论自艾林谷运来多少沃壤，依旧不能让鱼梁木在此生根茁长。于是历任公爵改种草坪，并在花朵繁茂的矮树丛间放置雕像。两位决斗者与提利昂·兰尼斯特的性命，便将在此交付天上诸神，做出最后决断。
Lysa, freshly scrubbed and garbed in cream velvet with a rope of sapphires and moonstones around her milk-white neck, was holding court on the terrace overlooking the scene of the combat, surrounded by her knights, retainers, and lords high and low. Most of them still hoped to wed her, bed her, and rule the Vale of Arryn by her side. From what Catelyn had seen during her stay at the Eyrie, it was a vain hope.
莱莎刚梳洗完毕，换了身奶油色的天鹅绒外衣，乳白的颈项间戴了一串青玉和月长石，这时正在露天阳台上主持集会。该处视野恰好可将决斗过程尽收眼底，莱莎身边围满了随从、骑士、以及大小领主。其中大部分人依旧怀着希望，想娶她睡她，然后与她并肩统治艾林谷。但就凯特琳这些天来在鹰巢城所见判断，他们的希望不大。
A wooden platform had been built to elevate Robert’s chair; there the Lord of the Eyrie sat, giggling and clapping his hands as a humpbacked puppeteer in blue-and-white motley made two wooden knights hack and slash at each other. Pitchers of thick cream and baskets of blackberries had been set out, and the guests were sipping a sweet orange-scented wine from engraved silver cups. A fool’s festival, Brynden had called it, and small wonder.
劳勃坐在高高的椅子上，座位下方搭了个木台，眼前有个穿着蓝白弄臣服的驼背木偶师，正操纵两个木头骑士相互砍杀，逗得鹰巢城公爵咯咯直笑，不停鼓掌。阳台上摆了一罐罐浓乳酪，以及一篮篮黑莓，宾客们正手拿雕花银杯，啜饮一种掺了橙香的甜葡萄酒。傻瓜过节，难怪布林登这么说。
Across the terrace, Lysa laughed gaily at some jest of Lord Hunter’s, and nibbled a blackberry from the point of Ser Lyn Corbray’s dagger. They were the suitors who stood highest in Lysa’s favor … today, at least. Catelyn would have been hard-pressed to say which man was more unsuitable. Eon Hunter was even older than Jon Arryn had been, half-crippled by gout, and cursed with three quarrelsome sons, each more grasping than the last. Ser Lyn was a different sort of folly; lean and handsome, heir to an ancient but impoverished house, but vain, reckless, hot-tempered … and, it was whispered, notoriously uninterested in the intimate charms of women.
阳台上，杭特伯爵说了个笑话，引得莱莎开怀大笑，然后她又从林恩·科布瑞爵士的匕首上咬过一颗黑莓。众位追求者中，便数他俩最得莱莎欢心……至少，今天的情形是如此。若问凯特琳他们谁比较不适合，她还真无从答起。伊恩·杭特的年纪比琼恩·艾林更大，害了痛风，走起路来有些跛，膝下还有三个争吵不休的儿子，一个比一个贪婪。林恩爵士则是另一番荒唐相，他苗条英俊，是古老而衰败的科布瑞家族的继承人，但他性好虚荣，脾气暴躁，行事又不加思考……有人更谣传，他对男文之间的亲密关系出了名的没兴趣。
When Lysa espied Catelyn, she welcomed her with a sisterly embrace and a moist kiss on the cheek. “Isn’t it a lovely morning? The gods are smiling on us. Do try a cup of the wine, sweet sister. Lord Hunter was kind enough to send for it, from his own cellars.”
莱莎远远望见凯特琳，立即起身热情拥抱，还在她颊上印下湿湿一吻。“早上天气可真好，你说是不是？天上诸神都在对我们微笑呢。亲爱的姐姐，快尝尝这酒，这是杭特大人特意从他自家酒窖里送来的。”
“Thank you, no. Lysa, we must talk.”
“谢谢，不用了。莱莎，我要跟你谈谈。”
“After,” her sister promised, already beginning to turn away from her.
“等下再说。”妹妹刚出口保证，就转身准备离开。
“Now.” Catelyn spoke more loudly than she’d intended. Men were turning to look. “Lysa, you cannot mean to go ahead with this folly. Alive, the Imp has value. Dead, he is only food for crows. And if his champion should prevail here—”
“现在要谈。”凯特琳不自觉地提高音量，引来旁人转头观望。“莱莎，你不能这样胡闹下去。小恶魔活着才有价值，死了就只能喂乌鸦。若是他的代理骑士打赢——”
“Small chance of that, my lady,” Lord Hunter assured her, patting her shoulder with a liver-spotted hand. “Ser Vardis is a doughty fighter. He will make short work of the sellsword.”
“夫人，我看没这可能。”杭特爵士伸出布满老人斑的手拍拍她肩膀，向她保证。“瓦狄斯爵士武艺超群，三两下便可把那佣兵解决掉。”
“Will he, my lord?” Catelyn said coolly. “I wonder.” She had seen Bronn fight on the high road; it was no accident that he had survived the journey while other men had died. He moved like a panther, and that ugly sword of his seemed a part of his arm.
“大人，你就这么有把握？”凯特琳冷冷地说，“我可不敢说。”她在山路上亲眼见识过波隆的身手，他之所以能活到现在，绝非偶然。他行动灵敏宛如猎豹，那柄丑陋的剑更仿佛与他手臂合为一体。
Lysa’s suitors were gathering around them like bees round a blossom. “Women understand little of these things,” Ser Morton Waynwood said. “Ser Vardis is a knight, sweet lady. This other fellow, well, his sort are all cowards at heart. Useful enough in a battle, with thousands of their fellows around them, but stand them up alone and the manhood leaks right out of them.”
莱莎的追求者们纷纷聚集过来，如同围绕花朵的蜜蜂。“女人家哪懂这种事？”莫顿·韦伍德爵士道，“亲爱的夫人，瓦狄斯爵士乃堂堂骑士。至于那家伙嘛，呵，他那种人骨子里都是懦夫。打仗的时候，几千个聚在一起，还管点用，可叫他一对一与人单打独斗，谅他没这能耐。”
“Say you have the truth of it, then,” Catelyn said with a courtesy that made her mouth ache. “What will we gain by the dwarf’s death? Do you imagine that Jaime will care a fig that we gave his brother a trial before we flung him off a mountain?”
“就算是这样，”凯特琳硬装出来的礼貌口吻，连自己都受不了。“敢问侏儒死了对我们有何好处？只要我们把他丢下山崖，您觉得詹姆会在乎我们有没有事先举行审判吗？”
“Behead the man,” Ser Lyn Corbray suggested. “When the Kingslayer receives the Imp’s head, it will be a warning to him.”
“干脆把他脑袋砍了，”林恩·科布瑞爵士提议，“再把首级送给弑君者，当作给他的警告。”
Lysa gave an impatient shake of her waist-long auburn hair. “Lord Robert wants to see him fly,” she said, as if that settled the matter. “And the Imp has only himself to blame. It was he who demanded a trial by combat.”
莱莎不耐烦地甩甩及腰的红棕长发。“劳勃大人想要看他飞，”她的语气仿佛在为这场争执划下句点。“要怪也只能怪小恶魔自己，当初要求比武审判的也是他。”
“Lady Lysa had no honorable way to deny him, even if she’d wished to,” Lord Hunter intoned ponderously.
“即使莱莎夫人想拒绝，也无法在兼顾礼数的前提下办到。”杭特伯爵语气沉重地发言。
Ignoring them all, Catelyn turned all her force on her sister. “I remind you, Tyrion Lannister is my prisoner.”
凯特琳不理睬他们，把所有的力气都用来对付妹妹。“容我提醒你，提利昂·兰尼斯特是我的犯人。”
“And I remind you , the dwarf murdered my lord husband!” Her voice rose. “He poisoned the Hand of the King and left my sweet baby fatherless, and now I mean to see him pay!” Whirling, her skirts swinging around her, Lysa stalked across the terrace. Ser Lyn and Ser Morton and the other suitors excused themselves with cool nods and trailed after her.
“让我也提醒你，侏儒谋害的是我丈夫！”她提高音量。“他毒害了国王的首相，让我宝贝小小年纪就没了父亲，现在我要他付出代价！”莱莎旋身，裙裾跟着飞扬，她昂首阔步地走到阳台的一边。林恩爵士、莫顿爵士和其他追求者冷冰冰地点头致意，跟在她身后离去。
“Do you think he did?” Ser Rodrik asked her quietly when they were alone again. “Murder Lord Jon, that is? The Imp still denies it, and most fiercely …”
“您认为真的是他干的吗？”只剩他们俩后，罗德利克爵士悄声问她。“谋害琼恩大人的事，是真的吗？小恶魔始终否认，坚决否认……”
“I believe the Lannisters murdered Lord Arryn,” Catelyn replied, “but whether it was Tyrion, or Ser Jaime, or the queen, or all of them together, I could not begin to say.” Lysa had named Cersei in the letter she had sent to Winterfell, but now she seemed certain that Tyrion was the killer … perhaps because the dwarf was here, while the queen was safe behind the walls of the Red Keep, hundreds of leagues to the south. Catelyn almost wished she had burned her sister’s letter before reading it.
“我相信谋害艾林大人的是兰尼斯特家的人，”凯特琳回答：“但究竟是提利昂，还是詹姆爵士，抑或王后，甚至三人都有份，我就不敢说了。”当初莱莎送到临冬城的信上指称瑟曦为凶手，而现在她似乎又认定提利昂才是真凶……这难道因为侏儒近在眼前，王后却在好几百里格以外的南方，安全地躲在红堡高墙之后？凯特琳不禁希望自己当初在没拆信之前，就先把它烧掉。
Ser Rodrik tugged at his whiskers. “Poison, well … that could be the dwarf’s work, true enough. Or Cersei’s. It’s said poison is a woman’s weapon, begging your pardons, my lady. The Kingslayer, now … I have no great liking for the man, but he’s not the sort. Too fond of the sight of blood on that golden sword of his. Was it poison, my lady?”
罗德利克爵士捻捻胡须。“若用毒药，那么……的确有可能是侏儒下的手，或者瑟曦。夫人，我无意冒犯，但人们不都说毒药是女人的武器吗？至于弑君者，呃……我对此人无甚好感，但他不像是会做这种事的人。他太喜欢看自己那把黄金宝剑染血了。夫人，真的是用毒药？”
Catelyn frowned, vaguely uneasy. “How else could they make it look a natural death?” Behind her, Lord Robert shrieked with delight as one of the puppet knights sliced the other in half, spilling a flood of red sawdust onto the terrace. She glanced at her nephew and sighed. “The boy is utterly without discipline. He will never be strong enough to rule unless he is taken away from his mother for a time.”
凯特琳有些不安地皱皱眉：“不然还有什么能造成自然死亡的假象？”身后，劳勃公爵眼见一个傀儡骑士把另外一个砍成两半，洒了一地红木屑，开心得兴奋尖叫。她瞄了外甥一眼，不禁叹气。“那孩子一点教养都没有。除非让他离开母亲身边一段时间，否则他永远不会有统治的能力。”
“His lord father agreed with you,” said a voice at her elbow. She turned to behold Maester Colemon, a cup of wine in his hand. “He was planning to send the boy to Dragonstone for fostering, you know … oh, but I’m speaking out of turn.” The apple of his throat bobbed anxiously beneath the loose maester’s chain. “I fear I’ve had too much of Lord Hunter’s excellent wine. The prospect of bloodshed has my nerves all a-fray …”
“他的先父也有同感。”身旁有个声音接口。她转过头，看见手拿酒杯的柯蒙学士。“事实上，他原本打算送这孩子去龙石岛做养子，您知道……唉，我这是说了不该说的话。”他的喉结在松垂的学士锁链下方焦虑地起伏。“恐怕我喝多了杭特大人的好酒。流血之事总教我紧张……”
“You are mistaken, Maester,” Catelyn said. “It was Casterly Rock, not Dragonstone, and those arrangements were made after the Hand’s death, without my sister’s consent.”
“学士，你一定是弄错了，”凯特琳道，“是凯岩城，不是龙石岛，而且还是首相死后，未经我妹妹同意安排的。”
The maester’s head jerked so vigorously at the end of his absurdly long neck that he looked half a puppet himself. “No, begging your forgiveness, my lady, but it was Lord Jon who—”
学士的头猛地一抖，配上他长得出奇的脖子，看起来活像个木偶。“不，请您原谅，夫人，这是琼恩大人他自己——”
A bell tolled loudly below them. High lords and serving girls alike broke off what they were doing and moved to the balustrade. Below, two guardsmen in sky-blue cloaks led forth Tyrion Lannister. The Eyrie’s plump septon escorted him to the statue in the center of the garden, a weeping woman carved in veined white marble, no doubt meant to be Alyssa.
他们下方铃声大作。贵族和侍女都不约而同放下手边的事，走到栏杆旁边。台下，两名身着天蓝色披风的卫兵领着提利昂·兰尼斯特出来。鹰巢城的臃肿修士伴他走到花园中央的石像旁。那是一座用带纹理的白色大理石雕刻出的、正在哭泣的女人，无疑便是阿莱莎。
“The bad little man,” Lord Robert said, giggling. “Mother, can I make him fly? I want to see him fly.”
“小坏蛋来了，”劳勃公爵咯咯笑道，“妈咪，我可以让他飞了吗？我想看他飞。”
“Later, my sweet baby,” Lysa promised him.
“再等一等，小宝贝。”莱莎向他保证。
“Trial first,” drawled Ser Lyn Corbray, “then execution.”
“先审判，”林恩·科布瑞爵士慢条斯理地说，“再处决。”
A moment later the two champions appeared from opposite sides of the garden. The knight was attended by two young squires, the sellsword by the Eyrie’s master-at-arms.
片刻之后，两名决斗者也从花园两边进场。骑士身边跟了两个年轻侍从，佣兵则由两位鹰巢城的士兵侍候。
Ser Vardis Egen was steel from head to heel, encased in heavy plate armor over mail and padded surcoat. Large circular rondels, enameled cream-and-blue in the moon-and-falcon sigil of House Arryn, protected the vulnerable juncture of arm and breast. A skirt of lobstered metal covered him from waist to midthigh, while a solid gorget encircled his throat. Falcon’s wings sprouted from the temples of his helm, and his visor was a pointed metal beak with a narrow slit for vision.
瓦狄斯·伊根爵士穿了锁甲和加垫外衣，其外从头到脚都被厚重的钢甲所覆盖。许多金属圆碟保护着手臂和胸膛间铠甲的交接处，它们都被涂成蓝白相间的艾林家族新月猎鹰纹章的式样。腰部到大腿罩着一件龙虾甲壳状的金属裙，脖子上则有一道坚固的颈甲。他的头盔两侧展出鹰翼，面罩是尖锐的鹰喙形状，只留一条细缝容他观察。
Bronn was so lightly armored he looked almost naked beside the knight. He wore only a shirt of black oiled ringmail over boiled leather, a round steel halfhelm with a noseguard, and a mail coif. High leather boots with steel shinguards gave some protection to his legs, and discs of black iron were sewn into the fingers of his gloves. Yet Catelyn noted that the sellsword stood half a hand taller than his foe, with a longer reach … and Bronn was fifteen years younger, if she was any judge.
轻装便甲的波隆，站在骑士身旁简直浑似赤身裸体。他只穿了件硬皮衣，外罩上好油的黑环甲，戴上金属头套和带护鼻的半罩圆盔。他挑了双高统皮靴，前端有钢制护腿，手套的指头部分缝上了黑铁环。凯特琳注意到佣兵足足比他的对手高出一头，手也较长……更别提两人的年龄差距了，根据她的目测，波隆起码年轻十五岁。
They knelt in the grass beneath the weeping woman, facing each other, with Lannister between them. The septon removed a faceted crystal sphere from the soft cloth bag at his waist. He lifted it high above his head, and the light shattered. Rainbows danced across the Imp’s face. In a high, solemn, singsong voice, the septon asked the gods to look down and bear witness, to find the truth in this man’s soul, to grant him life and freedom if he was innocent, death if he was guilty. His voice echoed off the surrounding towers.
他们在哭泣女人雕像脚下的草坪上面对面单膝跪地，兰尼斯特站在两人中间。修士从腰间的软布袋里取出一个多面水晶，高举过头，光线随即散射开来。七彩虹光轻跃过小恶魔的脸庞。修士以高亢、庄严，近乎歌唱的声调，请求天上诸神作见证，找出这人灵魂中的真相，若他无辜，则还其自由，若其有罪，则赐之以死。他的声音在四周的塔楼间回荡。
When the last echo had died away, the septon lowered his crystal and made a hasty departure. Tyrion leaned over and whispered something in Bronn’s ear before the guardsmen led him away. The sellsword rose laughing and brushed a blade of grass from his knee.
当最后一抹余音散去，修士放下水晶，快步离去。提利昂在卫兵将他带走前，凑到波隆耳边低声说了几句，佣兵听了哈哈大笑，起身拍拍膝盖上的草。
Robert Arryn, Lord of the Eyrie and Defender of the Vale, was fidgeting impatiently in his elevated chair. “When are they going to fight?” he asked plaintively.
鹰巢城公爵与峡谷守护者劳勃·艾林此时正不耐烦地在高高的座椅上扭来扭去。“他们什么时候开打？”他哀怨地问。
Ser Vardis was helped back to his feet by one of his squires. The other brought him a triangular shield almost four feet tall, heavy oak dotted with iron studs. They strapped it to his left forearm. When Lysa’s master-at-arms offered Bronn a similar shield, the sellsword spat and waved it away. Three days growth of coarse black beard covered his jaw and cheeks, but if he did not shave it was not for want of a razor; the edge of his sword had the dangerous glimmer of steel that had been honed every day for hours, until it was too sharp to touch.
瓦狄斯爵士的侍从之一扶他起身，另一个则为他拿来长近四尺，厚重橡木所制，表面有铁钉的三角形盾牌。两位侍从协力替他把盾绑在左臂前端。莱莎的士兵递给波隆一面类似的护盾，但佣兵啐了口唾沫，挥手拒绝。三天没刮的粗黑胡子盖住了他的下巴和两颊，但他决非没有剃刀。他的剑锋闪着致命的光泽，看得出每天都花好几个小时打磨，直到锋利得血肉难近为止。
Ser Vardis held out a gauntleted hand, and his squire placed a handsome double-edged longsword in his grasp. The blade was engraved with a delicate silver tracery of a mountain sky; its pommel was a falcon’s head, its crossguard fashioned into the shape of wings. “I had that sword crafted for Jon in King’s Landing,” Lysa told her guests proudly as they watched Ser Vardis try a practice cut. “He wore it whenever he sat the Iron Throne in King Robert’s place. Isn’t it a lovely thing? I thought it only fitting that our champion avenge Jon with his own blade.”
瓦狄斯爵士伸出一只戴着铁护腕的手，他的侍从递过一把漂亮的、两面开刃的长剑。剑身用银线雕镂出山间长空的纹理，剑柄如猎鹰的头，护手则是两只翅膀。“这把剑是我在君临的时候特意叫人为琼恩铸的，”莱莎骄傲地告诉她的宾客，他们都看着瓦狄斯爵士尝试挥舞。“每当他代替劳勃国王坐上铁王座，他总会配戴这柄剑。你们说它漂不漂亮？我认为让我们的骑士手持琼恩的剑替他复仇，是再恰当也不过了。”
The engraved silver blade was beautiful beyond a doubt, but it seemed to Catelyn that Ser Vardis might have been more comfortable with his own sword. Yet she said nothing; she was weary of futile arguments with her sister.
雕花银剑固然漂亮，但在凯特琳看来，若让瓦狄斯爵士用他自己的武器会更称手。可她深知与妹妹争执徒劳无功，因此什么也没说。
“Make them fight!” Lord Robert called out.
“叫他们快打！”劳勃公爵大喊。
Ser Vardis faced the Lord of the Eyrie and lifted his sword in salute. “For the Eyrie and the Vale!”
瓦狄斯爵士转身面向鹰巢城公爵，举剑致敬。“为鹰巢城和艾林谷而战！”
Tyrion Lannister had been seated on a balcony across the garden, flanked by his guards. It was to him that Bronn turned with a cursory salute.
提利昂·兰尼斯特被安排坐在花园对面的露天阳台上，身边围满了守卫。波隆转身漫不经心地朝他做了个敬礼的动作。
“They await your command,” Lady Lysa said to her lord son.
“他们就等你命令了。”莱莎夫人告诉她的公爵儿子。
“Fight!” the boy screamed, his arms trembling as they clutched at his chair.
“快打！”男孩尖叫，两手紧握座椅扶手，不住地颤抖。
Ser Vardis swiveled, bringing up his heavy shield. Bronn turned to face him. Their swords rang together, once, twice, a testing. The sellsword backed off a step. The knight came after, holding his shield before him. He tried a slash, but Bronn jerked back, just out of reach, and the silver blade cut only air. Bronn circled to his right. Ser Vardis turned to follow, keeping his shield between them. The knight pressed forward, placing each foot carefully on the uneven ground. The sellsword gave way, a faint smile playing over his lips. Ser Vardis attacked, slashing, but Bronn leapt away from him, hopping lightly over a low, moss-covered stone. Now the sellsword circled left, away from the shield, toward the knight’s unprotected side. Ser Vardis tried a hack at his legs, but he did not have the reach. Bronn danced farther to his left. Ser Vardis turned in place.
瓦狄斯爵士立刻旋身，举起重盾。波隆也转过来面对他。两人的长剑交锋一次，两次，彼此试探。佣兵后退一步，骑士举盾在前追赶。他挥出一剑，但波隆猛地后跳，躲到攻击范围之外，银剑划过空气。波隆转向右边，瓦狄斯爵士跟过去，依然高举护盾。骑士向前逼近，一步一步、小心翼翼地踩在不平坦的地面上。佣兵嘴边挂着淡淡的微笑，不断后退。瓦狄斯爵士挥剑猛攻，可波隆跳得更快，轻盈地跃过一块长满青苔的低矮石头。然后佣兵往左边绕，远离盾牌，朝骑士没有保护的那方而去。瓦狄斯爵士想砍他的腿，然而距离太远。波隆再往左跳，瓦狄斯爵士也跟着转身。
“The man is craven,” Lord Hunter declared. “Stand and fight, coward!” Other voices echoed the sentiment.
“这家伙是个懦夫，”杭特伯爵道，“胆小鬼，有种就光明正大地打！”其他人也同声附和。
Catelyn looked to Ser Rodrik. Her master-at-arms gave a curt shake of his head. “He wants to make Ser Vardis chase him. The weight of armor and shield will tire even the strongest man.”
凯特琳望向罗德利克爵士。她的教头简短地摇头道：“他故意让瓦狄斯爵士追他。全副武装加上盾牌，再强壮的人也会很快疲累。”
She had seen men practice at their swordplay near every day of her life, had viewed half a hundred tourneys in her time, but this was something different and deadlier: a dance where the smallest misstep meant death. And as she watched, the memory of another duel in another time came back to Catelyn Stark, as vivid as if it had been yesterday.
其实，她几乎是看着他人练剑长大，观赏过的比武竞技不只半百，然而眼前这场决斗却与之殊异，更为致命：一招棋错，便在劫难逃。看着这番场景，凯特琳·史塔克却忆起了在不同时间，不同地点，曾经发生过的另一场决斗，在脑海中历历如绘，恍如昨日。
They met in the lower bailey of Riverrun. When Brandon saw that Petyr wore only helm and breastplate and mail, he took off most of his armor. Petyr had begged her for a favor he might wear, but she had turned him away. Her lord father promised her to Brandon Stark, and so it was to him that she gave her token, a pale blue handscarf she had embroidered with the leaping trout of Riverrun. As she pressed it into his hand, she pleaded with him. “He is only a foolish boy, but I have loved him like a brother. It would grieve me to see him die.” And her betrothed looked at her with the cool grey eyes of a Stark and promised to spare the boy who loved her.
那是在奔流城的下层庭院。布兰登眼见培提尔只穿戴头盔、护胸和锁甲，便也脱去自己的大半护具。当时培提尔恳求她以信物相赠，却被她拒绝。既然她被父亲大人许配给布兰登·史塔克，她的信物自然归他所有。那是由她亲手缝制的淡蓝手帕，上面绣着奔流城的飞跃鳟鱼。当她把手帕塞进他手中时，她向他恳求：“他只是个傻孩子，但我把他当弟弟一样疼爱。他若是死了，我会很难过。”她的未婚夫听了，便用那双史塔克家的冷静灰眸看着她，并答应饶那疯狂爱着她的小子一命。
That fight was over almost as soon as it began. Brandon was a man grown, and he drove Littlefinger all the way across the bailey and down the water stair, raining steel on him with every step, until the boy was staggering and bleeding from a dozen wounds. “Yield!” he called, more than once, but Petyr would only shake his head and fight on, grimly. When the river was lapping at their ankles, Brandon finally ended it, with a brutal backhand cut that bit through Petyr’s rings and leather into the soft flesh below the ribs, so deep that Catelyn was certain that the wound was mortal. He looked at her as he fell and murmured “Cat” as the bright blood came flowing out between his mailed fingers. She thought she had forgotten that.
决斗才刚开始便告结束。已经成年的布兰登逼得小指头节节后退，从城堡庭院一直退到临水阶梯，攻势猛烈，剑如雨下，打得那男孩脚步踉跄，浑身是伤。“快投降！”他不止一次呼喊，但培提尔总是摇摇头，执拗地继续奋战。最后在水深及踝的地方，布兰登终于做出了断，他反手一记猛烈的挥砍，穿透培提尔的护胸环甲和皮革，划破肋骨下方的柔软血肉，伤口之深，凯特琳以为必定致命。他倒在血泊中，一边凝望着她，喃喃念着“凯特”，同时明艳的鲜血从他铁手套间汩汩涌出。这一切，她以为自己早已遗忘。
That was the last time she had seen his face … until the day she was brought before him in King’s Landing.
那是她最后一次见到他的脸庞……直到那天他们在君临重逢。
A fortnight passed before Littlefinger was strong enough to leave Riverrun, but her lord father forbade her to visit him in the tower where he lay abed. Lysa helped their maester nurse him; she had been softer and shyer in those days. Edmure had called on him as well, but Petyr had sent him away. Her brother had acted as Brandon’s squire at the duel, and Littlefinger would not forgive that. As soon as he was strong enough to be moved, Lord Hoster Tully sent Petyr Baelish away in a closed litter, to finish his healing on the Fingers, upon the windswept jut of rock where he’d been born.
小指头足足休养了两个星期，才有体力离开奔流城，然而她的父亲大人却禁止她到塔里的病房去探望。是莱莎协助学士照顾他，当年的她温柔得多，也害羞得多。艾德慕也去探望过，然而培提尔不愿见他。弟弟在决斗中担任布兰登的助手，小指头说什么也不能原谅。待他体力稍稍恢复，霍斯特·徒利公爵便派人将培提尔·贝里席放进一个密闭小轿，将他抬回五指半岛强风呼啸的嶙峋巨岩，回到他的诞生地继续疗养。
The ringing clash of steel on steel jarred Catelyn back to the present. Ser Vardis was coming hard at Bronn, driving into him with shield and sword. The sellsword scrambled backward, checking each blow, stepping lithely over rock and root, his eyes never leaving his foe. He was quicker, Catelyn saw; the knight’s silvered sword never came near to touching him, but his own ugly grey blade hacked a notch from Ser Vardis’s shoulder plate.
刀剑的金属交击将凯特琳拉回现实。瓦狄斯爵士剑盾并用，攻势猛烈。佣兵不断后退，挡下道道攻势，脚步轻灵地跳过石块与树根，眼睛却从未离开对手。凯特琳发现他的动作极其灵敏，骑士的银剑始终碰不到他，而他那把丑恶的灰剑却在瓦狄斯爵士的肩甲上划了一道。
The brief flurry of fighting ended as swiftly as it had begun when Bronn sidestepped and slid behind the statue of the weeping woman. Ser Vardis lunged at where he had been, striking a spark off the pale marble of Alyssa’s thigh.
突然，波隆溜到哭泣女人的雕像背后。瓦狄斯爵士收势不及，一剑朝他刚才的位置挥去，阿莱莎的白色大理石腿上火花迸发，两人这场迅捷的过招才开始没多久，便就暂告段落。
“They’re not fighting good, Mother,” the Lord of the Eyrie complained. “I want them to fight.”
“妈咪，他们打得不好看，”鹰巢城主抱怨，“我要看他们打真的。”
“They will, sweet baby,” his mother soothed him. “The sellsword can’t run all day.”
“宝贝乖，他们马上就打给你看。”他母亲安慰他，“佣兵跑不了一整天的。”
Some of the lords on Lysa’s terrace were making wry jests as they refilled their wine cups, but across the garden, Tyrion Lannister’s mismatched eyes watched the champions dance as if there were nothing else in the world.
莱莎所在的阳台上，有些贵族一边对波隆冷嘲热讽，一边斟酒笑闹，然而在花园对面，提利昂-兰尼斯特那双大小不一的眼睛却全神贯注地看着两位决斗者你来我往，似乎身边一切都已消失。
Bronn came out from behind the statue hard and fast, still moving left, aiming a two-handed cut at the knight’s unshielded right side. Ser Vardis blocked, but clumsily, and the sellsword’s blade flashed upward at his head. Metal rang, and a falcon’s wing collapsed with a crunch. Ser Vardis took a half step back to brace himself, raised his shield. Oak chips flew as Bronn’s sword hacked at the wooden wall. The sellsword stepped left again, away from the shield, and caught Ser Vardis across the stomach, the razor edge of his blade leaving a bright gash when it bit into the knight’s plate.
波隆倏地自雕像后窜出，依旧向左，双手擎剑朝骑士没有盾牌保护的那边猛砍。瓦狄斯爵士虽然挡下，但挡得很勉强。佣兵的剑顺势往上一弹，朝对方的头部扑去。只听铿锵一声，猎鹰的一只翅膀应声而断。瓦狄斯爵士后退半步，稳住身子，然后又举起盾牌。波隆的剑攻向这道木墙，砍得木屑四溅。佣兵再度向左，避开盾牌，一剑正中瓦狄斯爵士腹部，在骑士的铠甲上留下一道鲜明的裂口。
Ser Vardis drove forward off his back foot, his own silver blade descending in a savage arc. Bronn slammed it aside and danced away. The knight crashed into the weeping woman, rocking her on her plinth. Staggered, he stepped backward, his head turning this way and that as he searched for his foe. The slit visor of his helm narrowed his vision.
瓦狄斯爵士后脚一蹬，手中银剑凌空挥出一道凶猛的圆弧。波隆硬是把它拨开，然后跳出去。骑士撞上哭泣的女人，震得她在基座上摇晃。他踉跄着退开，左顾右盼搜索对手，面罩上的细缝限制了他的视线。
“Behind you, ser!” Lord Hunter shouted, too late. Bronn brought his sword down with both hands, catching Ser Vardis in the elbow of his sword arm. The thin lobstered metal that protected the joint crunched . The knight grunted, turning, wrenching his weapon up. This time Bronn stood his ground. The swords flew at each other, and their steel song filled the garden and rang off the white towers of the Eyrie.
“爵士先生，在你后面！”杭特伯爵大喝，可惜为时已晚。波隆双手举剑，狠狠往下一斩，正中瓦狄斯爵士的右手肘。保护关节的细薄圆碟响声大作。骑士闷哼着转身，托起长剑。这回波隆守在原地，两人你来我往，刀剑交织出的金属歌声响彻花园，回荡在鹰巢城的七座白塔之间。
“Ser Vardis is hurt,” Ser Rodrik said, his voice grave.
“瓦狄斯爵士受伤了。”罗德利克爵士语气沉重地说。
Catelyn did not need to be told; she had eyes, she could see the bright finger of blood running along the knight’s forearm, the wetness inside the elbow joint. Every parry was a little slower and a little lower than the one before. Ser Vardis turned his side to his foe, trying to use his shield to block instead, but Bronn slid around him, quick as a cat. The sellsword seemed to be getting stronger. His cuts were leaving their marks now. Deep shiny gashes gleamed all over the knight’s armor, on his right thigh, his beaked visor, crossing on his breastplate, a long one along the front of his gorget. The moon-and-falcon rondel over Ser Vardis’s right arm was sheared clean in half, hanging by its strap. They could hear his labored breath, rattling through the air holes in his visor.
不需他说，凯特琳也看得见鲜血正如无数手指，从他前臂缓缓流下，她还看得见他手肘关节的黏湿。他的每记挡格越来越慢，越来越低。瓦狄斯爵士侧身面对敌人，想用盾牌抵挡攻势，然而波隆也跟着侧移，行动灵敏如猫。而今，佣兵似乎愈发强壮，他的挥砍陆续留下痕迹。骑士的铠甲、右腿、喙状面罩和护胸，甚至颈甲都印上了深陷的闪亮凹痕。瓦狄斯爵士右臂的新月猎鹰圆碟被砍成两截，挂在皮带上。他们可以听见从他面罩里传出的沉重呼吸。
Blind with arrogance as they were, even the knights and lords of the Vale could see what was happening below them, yet her sister could not. “Enough, Ser Vardis!” Lady Lysa called down. “Finish him now, my baby is growing tired.”
无论在场的众峡谷骑士和贵族多么高傲自大，他们都很清楚下面情势如何，只有妹妹依旧看不到真相。“瓦狄斯爵士，打够了，”莱莎夫人向下高喊，“快收拾他，我的宝贝等得不耐烦了。”
And it must be said of Ser Vardis Egen that he was true to his lady’s command, even to the last. One moment he was reeling backward, half-crouched behind his scarred shield; the next he charged. The sudden bull rush caught Bronn off balance. Ser Vardis crashed into him and slammed the lip of his shield into the sellsword’s face. Almost, almost , Bronn lost his feet … he staggered back, tripped over a rock, and caught hold of the weeping woman to keep his balance. Throwing aside his shield, Ser Vardis lurched after him, using both hands to raise his sword. His right arm was blood from elbow to fingers now, yet his last desperate blow would have opened Bronn from neck to navel … if the sellsword had stood to receive it.
瓦狄斯·伊根爵士的确是忠心耿耿，至死不渝。原本他还蹒跚后退，半蹲着躲在他那伤痕累累的盾牌后面，听了这话，他转而向前冲锋。这阵突如其来的猛攻大出波隆意外。瓦狄斯爵士跟他撞在一起，并将盾牌狠狠地朝佣兵面部砸去，差一点，差一点就把波隆打倒在地……佣兵踉跄后退，被一块石头绊到，赶忙扶住哭泣的女人维持重心。瓦狄斯爵士抛下盾牌，双手举剑猛扑上去。他的右手从肘部到指尖全都是血，但他最后的死命一击足以将波隆从头到脚劈成两半……如果佣兵跟他硬碰硬的话。
But Bronn jerked back. Jon Arryn’s beautiful engraved silver sword glanced off the marble elbow of the weeping woman and snapped clean a third of the way up the blade. Bronn put his shoulder into the statue’s back. The weathered likeness of Alyssa Arryn tottered and fell with a great crash, and Ser Vardis Egen went down beneath her.
反之，波隆箭步向后跳开。琼恩·艾林漂亮的雕花银剑砍到哭泣女人的大理石手肘，剑身三分之一处应声而断。这时波隆用肩膀拼命朝雕像背部撞去，饱经风雨摧残的阿莱莎·艾林雕像摇晃几下之后轰然倒下，将瓦狄斯·伊根爵士压在下面。
Bronn was on him in a heartbeat, kicking what was left of his shattered rondel aside to expose the weak spot between arm and breastplate. Ser Vardis was lying on his side, pinned beneath the broken torso of the weeping woman. Catelyn heard the knight groan as the sellsword lifted his blade with both hands and drove it down and in with all his weight behind it, under the arm and through the ribs. Ser Vardis Egen shuddered and lay still.
转瞬间波隆已踏上他身体，踢开残余的金属圆碟碎片，暴露出手臂和胸甲间的脆弱部位。瓦狄斯爵士侧身躺卧，被断裂的哭泣女人雕像压住的躯体无法动弹。凯特琳听见骑士不住呻吟。佣兵双手握剑高举，用尽全身力气，狠命刺进，划过手臂，穿透肋骨。瓦狄斯·伊根爵士抖了一下，便不再动弹。
Silence hung over the Eyrie. Bronn yanked off his halfhelm and let it fall to the grass. His lip was smashed and bloody where the shield had caught him, and his coal-black hair was soaked with sweat. He spit out a broken tooth.
一阵死寂笼罩着鹰巢城。波隆拔掉半罩头盔，扔在草坪上。刚才被盾牌撞到的嘴唇，此刻正流着血，炭黑色的头发也被汗水完全浸湿。他吐出一颗打落的牙齿。
“Is it over, Mother?” the Lord of the Eyrie asked.
“妈咪，结束了吗？”鹰巢城公爵问。
No , Catelyn wanted to tell him, it’s only now beginning .
不，凯特琳想告诉他，一切才刚刚开始。
“Yes,” Lysa said glumly, her voice as cold and dead as the captain of her guard.
“是的。”莱莎郁闷地说，声音一如她的侍卫队长那般冰冷而死寂。
“Can I make the little man fly now?”
“现在我可以让那个小坏蛋飞了吗？”
Across the garden, Tyrion Lannister got to his feet. “Not this little man,” he said. “This little man is going down in the turnip hoist, thank you very much.”
花园的另一头，提利昂站起身。“总之飞的不会是我这个小坏蛋，”他说，“这个小坏蛋打算跟萝卜一起搭篮子下山去，感谢您的关照。”
“You presume—” Lysa began.
“你以为——”莱莎开口。
“I presume that House Arryn remembers its own words,” the Imp said. “As High as Honor.”
“我以为艾林家族还记得他们的族语，”小恶魔道，“高如荣誉。”
“You promised I could make him fly,” the Lord of the Eyrie screamed at his mother. He began to shake.
“你答应我可以让他飞的。”鹰巢城公爵对他母亲尖叫，然后开始颤抖。
Lady Lysa’s face was flushed with fury. “The gods have seen fit to proclaim him innocent, child. We have no choice but to free him.” She lifted her voice. “Guards. Take my lord of Lannister and his … creature here out of my sight. Escort them to the Bloody Gate and set them free. See that they have horses and supplies sufficient to reach the Trident, and make certain all their goods and weapons are returned to them. They shall need them on the high road.”
莱莎夫人气得满脸通红。“孩子，天上诸神认为这人无辜，除了放他走，我们别无选择。”她提高音量，“来人，把兰尼斯特家的大人和他……那只怪物给我带走。护送他们到血门，然后放他们自由。要为他们准备足以维持到三叉戟河的马匹和粮食，同时务必归还他们一切行李和武器。他们走山路，想必会很需要这些装备。”
“The high road,” Tyrion Lannister said. Lysa allowed herself a faint, satisfied smile. It was another sort of death sentence, Catelyn realized. Tyrion Lannister must know that as well. Yet the dwarf favored Lady Arryn with a mocking bow. “As you command, my lady,” he said. “I believe we know the way.”
“走山路？”提利昂·兰尼斯特道。莱莎嘴角泛起一丝细小但得意的微笑。凯特琳忽然明白过来，这不啻另一种死刑。提利昂·兰尼斯特想必也很清楚。然而侏儒仅故作礼貌地朝莱莎·艾林鞠了个躬。“遵命，夫人。”他说，“我们认得这条路。”
*JON
第四十二章 琼恩
“Y ou are as hopeless as any boys I have ever trained,” Ser Alliser Thorne announced when they had all assembled in the yard. “Your hands were made for manure shovels, not for swords, and if it were up to me, the lot of you would be set to herding swine. But last night I was told that Gueren is marching five new boys up the kingsroad. One or two may even be worth the price of piss. To make room for them, I have decided to pass eight of you on to the Lord Commander to do with as he will.” He called out the names one by one. “Toad. Stone Head. Aurochs. Lover. Pimple. Monkey. Ser Loon.” Last, he looked at Jon. “And the Bastard.”
“我从没见过像你们这么无可救药的小鬼。”等他们全体聚集在训练场里，艾里沙·索恩爵士说，“你们的手生来只配挑粪，没资格拿剑。若是依我之见，我会发配你们通通去养猪。可是昨晚我听说葛伦正带着五个小伙子，从国王大道上来。其中一两个或许还有救。为了给他们腾出位置，我决定放过你们其中八个，交给司令官去处置。”他一个接一个喊出名字，“癞蛤蟆、呆头、大笨牛、娘娘腔、雀斑男、猴子、蠢蛋爵士，”最后他看看琼恩，“还有野种。”
Pyp let fly a whoop and thrust his sword into the air. Ser Alliser fixed him with a reptile stare. “They will call you men of Night’s Watch now, but you are bigger fools than the Mummer’s Monkey here if you believe that. You are boys still, green and stinking of summer, and when the winter comes you will die like flies.” And with that, Ser Alliser Thorne took his leave of them.
派普呼了口气，兴奋得把剑抛向空中。艾里沙爵士恶狠狠地瞪着他说：“从现在起，别人会称你们作守夜人，但如果你们信以为真，那就是天字第一号大笨蛋。你们都还是乳臭未干的小毛头，身上都是夏天味道，等冬天一来，你们就会像苍蝇一样全部死得四脚朝天。”说完艾里沙·索恩爵士便离开了。
The other boys gathered round the eight who had been named, laughing and cursing and offering congratulations. Halder smacked Toad on the butt with the flat of his sword and shouted, “Toad, of the Night’s Watch!” Yelling that a black brother needed a horse, Pyp leapt onto Grenn’s shoulders, and they tumbled to the ground, rolling and punching and hooting. Dareon dashed inside the armory and returned with a skin of sour red. As they passed the wine from hand to hand, grinning like fools, Jon noticed Samwell Tarly standing by himself beneath a bare dead tree in the corner of the yard. Jon offered him the skin. “A swallow of wine?”
其他男孩立即把八个被擢升的人团团围住，又笑又骂，连声道贺。霍德用剑脊敲敲陶德的屁股，大喊：“现在你可是守夜人癞蛤蟆啦！”派普嚷着说要当黑衫军先得有坐骑，一跃跳上葛兰肩膀，两人同时扑倒，在地上翻滚打闹怪叫。戴利恩冲进武器库，回来时手中多了一袋劣等红酒。正当他们轮流喝酒，像呆瓜似地傻笑时，琼恩注意到山姆威尔·塔利孤伶伶地站在广场角落一棵光秃秃的树下。琼恩把酒袋递过去。“要不要来一口？”
Sam shook his head. “No thank you, Jon.”
山姆摇摇头。“不用了，琼恩，谢谢。”
“Are you well?”
“你还好吧？”
“Very well, truly,” the fat boy lied. “I am so happy for you all.” His round face quivered as he forced a smile. “You will be First Ranger someday, just as your uncle was.”
“我很好，真的。”胖男孩在撒谎，“我真为你们高兴。”他试图挤出一抹微笑，结果只有那张圆脸木然地晃动。“有朝一日你一定会当上首席游骑兵，像你叔叔从前那样。”
“Is ,” Jon corrected. He would not accept that Benjen Stark was dead. Before he could say more, Halder cried, “Here, you planning to drink that all yourself?” Pyp snatched the skin from his hand and danced away, laughing. While Grenn seized his arm, Pyp gave the skin a squeeze, and a thin stream of red squirted Jon in the face. Halder howled in protest at the waste of good wine. Jon sputtered and struggled. Matthar and Jeren climbed the wall and began pelting them all with snowballs.
“我叔叔现在还是首席游骑兵。”琼恩纠正他。他绝不相信班扬·史塔克已死。他还来不及再说，只听霍德喊道，“好家伙，你打算独吞啊？”派普从他手中一把攫走酒袋，笑着跑开。葛兰抓住他的手，派普使劲把酒袋一捏，一股细细的红色酒柱便喷到琼恩脸上。霍德大吼着叫他别浪费好东西。琼恩含含糊糊、说不出话，挣扎着想站稳，这时梅沙和杰伦爬到墙上，开始朝他们猛扔雪球。
By the time he wrenched free, with snow in his hair and wine stains on his surcoat, Samwell Tarly had gone.
等他挣脱开来，满头是雪，衣服上也都是葡萄酒，山姆威尔·塔利已经走了。
That night, Three-Finger Hobb cooked the boys a special meal to mark the occasion. When Jon arrived at the common hall, the Lord Steward himself led him to the bench near the fire. The older men clapped him on the arm in passing. The eight soon-to-be brothers feasted on rack of lamb baked in a crust of garlic and herbs, garnished with sprigs of mint, and surrounded by mashed yellow turnips swimming in butter. “From the Lord Commander’s own table,” Bowen Marsh told them. There were salads of spinach and chickpeas and turnip greens, and afterward bowls of iced blueberries and sweet cream.
当晚，三指哈布为庆祝男孩们的晋升，特别煮了顿丰盛晚餐。琼恩走进大厅时，总务长亲自领他前往靠近火炉的座位，途中老鸟们纷纷拍他表示嘉许。八个即将成为黑衣弟兄的男孩品尝了薄荷叶装饰、用大蒜和药草烤的羊肉，以及浸在奶油里的黄萝卜泥。“这可是总司令的餐桌上才有的好东西。”波文·马尔锡告诉他们。除此之外，桌上还有用菠菜、鹰嘴豆和芜菁做的凉拌沙拉，饭后甜点则是冰镇的蓝莓和甜奶油。
“Do you think they’ll keep us together?” Pyp wondered as they gorged themselves happily.
“你觉得他们会把我们编在一起吗？”当他们开心地狼吞虎咽时，派普不禁问。
Toad made a face. “I hope not. I’m sick of looking at those ears of yours.”
陶德扮了个鬼脸。“希望不会，我受够了你那双丑耳朵。”
“Ho,” said Pyp. “Listen to the crow call the raven black. You’re certain to be a ranger, Toad. They’ll want you as far from the castle as they can. If Mance Rayder attacks, lift your visor and show your face, and he’ll run off screaming.”
“哟，”派普说，“天下乌鸦还不是一般黑。癞蛤蟆，我看你游骑兵是当定了，因为他们会把你派得离城堡越远越好。若是曼斯·雷德打来，只需掀开面罩，叫他们瞧瞧你那张脸，保管他们落荒而逃啊。”
Everyone laughed but Grenn. “I hope I’m a ranger.”
除了葛兰，大家哄堂而笑。“我真心希望自己能当游骑兵呢。”
“You and everyone else,” said Matthar. Every man who wore the black walked the Wall, and every man was expected to take up steel in its defense, but the rangers were the true fighting heart of the Night’s Watch. It was they who dared ride beyond the Wall, sweeping through the haunted forest and the icy mountain heights west of the Shadow Tower, fighting Wildlings and giants and monstrous snow bears.
“我们不都一样。”梅沙道。黑衫军的每一位成员都有防守长城之责，若是敌人来袭，人人都必须举剑迎敌，然而游骑兵才是守夜人部队中真正的战斗主力。只有他们会骑马北出长城，扫荡影子塔以西鬼影幢幢的森林和冰雪覆盖的崇山峻岭，与野人、巨人和怪物般的雪熊作战。
“Not everyone,” said Halder. “It’s the builders for me. What use would rangers be if the Wall fell down?”
“那可不一定，”霍德说，“我就想当工匠。若是长城垮了，游骑兵还有什么用呢？”
The order of builders provided the masons and carpenters to repair keeps and towers, the miners to dig tunnels and crush stone for roads and footpaths, the woodsmen to clear away new growth wherever the forest pressed too close to the Wall. Once, it was said, they had quarried immense blocks of ice from frozen lakes deep in the haunted forest, dragging them south on sledges so the Wall might be raised ever higher. Those days were centuries gone, however; now, it was all they could do to ride the Wall from Eastwatch to the Shadow Tower, watching for cracks or signs of melt and making what repairs they could.
工匠群体包括负责维修堡垒和塔楼的石匠和木匠；负责挖掘隧道，敲碎石头铺路的矿工；负责砍伐靠近长城的树林的樵夫。据说多年以前，工匠们从鬼影森林中的冰湖运来巨大冰块，用雪橇南运，以将长城砌高。然而距离那样的年代，已经过了好几百年，如今他们所能做的，便只是沿着城墙，从东海望走到影子塔，修补沿途的裂缝，注意融化的迹象。
“The Old Bear’s no fool,” Dareon observed. “You’re certain to be a builder, and Jon’s certain to be a ranger. He’s the best sword and the best rider among us, and his uncle was the First before he …” His voice trailed off awkwardly as he realized what he had almost said.
“熊老可不是笨蛋，”戴利恩发表意见，“你一定会当上工匠，而琼恩也一定会当上游骑兵。咱们这群人里面他不仅剑使得最好，骑术也最棒，更何况他叔叔生前也是首……”他想起自己提到了什么，不自在地住嘴。
“Benjen Stark is still First Ranger,” Jon Snow told him, toying with his bowl of blueberries. The rest might have given up all hope of his uncle’s safe return, but not him. He pushed away the berries, scarcely touched, and rose from the bench.
“班扬·史塔克依旧是首席游骑兵。”琼恩·雪诺一边把玩着手中那碗蓝莓，一边对他说。别人或许对叔叔安然归来不抱期望，但他不会。他推开几乎碰都没碰的蓝莓，起身离开长凳。
“Aren’t you going to eat those?” Toad asked.
“这些你还要不要？”陶德问。
“They’re yours.” Jon had hardly tasted Hobb’s great feast. “I could not eat another bite.” He took his cloak from its hook near the door and shouldered his way out.
“都给你。”事实上，连哈布精心烹调的晚餐，琼恩也几乎没动。“我吃不下了。”他从门边的挂勾上取下斗篷，穿了就准备出去。
Pyp followed him. “Jon, what is it?”
派普跟上来。“琼恩，怎么了？”
“Sam,” he admitted. “He was not at table tonight.”
“是山姆，”他承认，“今晚他没上桌。”
“It’s not like him to miss a meal,” Pyp said thoughtfully. “Do you suppose he’s taken ill?”
“这家伙可不像是会错过餐点的人，”派普若有所思地说，“你觉得他生病了？”
“He’s frightened. We’re leaving him.” He remembered the day he had left Winterfell, all the bittersweet farewells; Bran lying broken, Robb with snow in his hair, Arya raining kisses on him after he’d given her Needle. “Once we say our words, we’ll all have duties to attend to. Some of us may be sent away, to Eastwatch or the Shadow Tower. Sam will remain in training, with the likes of Rast and Cuger and these new boys who are coming up the kingsroad. Gods only know what they’ll be like, but you can bet Ser Alliser will send them against him, first chance he gets.”
“他在害怕。因为我们就要离开他了。”他忆起自己离开临冬城当天，那些悲喜交加的道别。布兰支离破碎地躺在床上，罗柏发际还有雪花，艾莉亚则是得到“缝衣针”后疯狂地吻他。“等我们宣过誓，就会有各自应尽的义务。有些人可能被派往远方，前往东海望或影子塔。只有山姆会留下来继续受训，而雷斯特或库格那种人正在国王大道上等着他。天知道他们是什么德行，不过可以肯定艾里沙爵士一有机会就会叫他们去对付他。”
Pyp made a grimace. “You did all you could.”
派普皱眉：“能做的你都做了。”
“All we could wasn’t enough,” Jon said.
“我们做的还不够。”琼恩说。
A deep restlessness was on him as he went back to Hardin’s Tower for Ghost. The direwolf walked beside him to the stables. Some of the more skittish horses kicked at their stalls and laid back their ears as they entered. Jon saddled his mare, mounted, and rode out from Castle Black, south across the moonlit night. Ghost raced ahead of him, flying over the ground, gone in the blink of an eye. Jon let him go. A wolf needed to hunt.
他回哈丁塔找白灵时，心中感到深切的不安。冰原狼跟在他身边走向马厩，刚一进门，几匹比较激动的马便伸腿踢栏，两耳后竖。琼恩为他的母马上鞍，骑出黑城堡，就着月光和夜色往南行去。白灵飞奔在前，转眼便消失无踪。琼恩由他去，狼总有打猎的本能。
He had no destination in mind. He wanted only to ride. He followed the creek for a time, listening to the icy trickle of water over rock, then cut across the fields to the kingsroad. It stretched out before him, narrow and stony and pocked with weeds, a road of no particular promise, yet the sight of it filled Jon Snow with a vast longing. Winterfell was down that road, and beyond it Riverrun and King’s Landing and the Eyrie and so many other places; Casterly Rock, the Isles of Faces, the red mountains of Dorne, the hundred islands of Braavos in the sea, the smoking ruins of old Valyria. All the places that Jon would never see. The world was down that road … and he was here.
他的脑中漫无目的，纯粹只想骑马。他先是沿溪而行，聆听冰冷的溪水流过岩石，接着穿越旷野，踏上国王大道。道路在眼前伸展，狭窄、多石、杂草从生，看上去并非通往光明与希望的途径。然而这道路，却让琼恩·雪诺心里盈满思慕之情。临冬城就在路上某地，如果继续前行，则会抵达奔流城、君临、鹰巢城和其他许多地方，例如凯岩城、千面屿，多恩领的红色山脉，海中布拉佛斯的百余列岛，瓦雷西亚浓烟滚滚的古老废墟。这些地方琼恩永远不能得见。世界在路的彼端……而他却在这里。
Once he swore his vow, the Wall would be his home until he was old as Maester Aemon. “I have not sworn yet,” he muttered. He was no outlaw, bound to take the black or pay the penalty for his crimes. He had come here freely, and he might leave freely … until he said the words. He need only ride on, and he could leave it all behind. By the time the moon was full again, he would be back in Winterfell with his brothers.
一旦他发下誓言，便将以此为家，在此终老，和伊蒙师傅一样。“我还没发誓呢。”他喃喃自语。他并非违法乱纪之人，不像他们若不穿上黑衣，便得接受法律制裁。他以自由之身来到这里，同样也可以自由之身离去……除非他开口宣誓。他只需继续骑行，便可抛开这里的一切。等到新月再度满盈，他已经返回临冬城，与兄弟重新团聚。
Your half brothers, a voice inside reminded him. And Lady Stark, who will not welcome you . There was no place for him in Winterfell, no place in King’s Landing either. Even his own mother had not had a place for him. The thought of her made him sad. He wondered who she had been, what she had looked like, why his father had left her. Because she was a whore or an adulteress, fool. Something dark and dishonorable, or else why was Lord Eddard too ashamed to speak of her?
他们是你同父异母的兄弟，心中有一个声音在提醒他。还有不欢迎你的史塔克夫人。临冬城里无他容身之地，更不用说君临。连他自己的母亲也无法安顿他。想到她，他不禁难过起来。他想知道她是谁，长什么样，想知道父亲为何离开她。白痴，因为她是个妓女，要不然就是个有夫之妇。一定是牵连到某些阴暗又不名誉的事，否则艾德大人为何羞于提及？
Jon Snow turned away from the kingsroad to look behind him. The fires of Castle Black were hidden behind a hill, but the Wall was there, pale beneath the moon, vast and cold, running from horizon to horizon.
琼恩·雪诺将视线从国王大道转开，回头往后看去。黑城堡的灯火被一座小丘遮蔽，但巨大而冷漠的长城，却在月光照耀下直向天际，清晰可见。
He wheeled his horse around and started for home.
他调转马头，朝家的方向奔去。
Ghost returned as he crested a rise and saw the distant glow of lamplight from the Lord Commander’s Tower. The direwolf’s muzzle was red with blood as he trotted beside the horse. Jon found himself thinking of Samwell Tarly again on the ride back. By the time he reached the stables, he knew what he must do.
他刚爬过缓丘，瞧见远处司令塔的火光，白灵便回来了。冰原狼的口鼻一片血红，缓步跟在马旁边。在回去的路上，琼恩发现自己再度想起了山姆威尔·塔利。等他回到马厩，心里已有了主意。
Maester Aemon’s apartments were in a stout wooden keep below the rookery. Aged and frail, the maester shared his chambers with two of the younger stewards, who tended to his needs and helped him in his duties. The brothers joked that he had been given the two ugliest men in the Night’s Watch; being blind, he was spared having to look at them. Clydas was short, bald, and chinless, with small pink eyes like a mole. Chett had a wen on his neck the size of a pigeon’s egg, and a face red with boils and pimples. Perhaps that was why he always seemed so angry.
伊蒙学士的居所在一座坚固的木造堡垒内，正好位于鸦巢下方。学士年纪大了，身体也虚弱，因此他和两个负责照顾他起居，平时则协助他处理事务的年轻事务官住在一起。兄弟们间有个笑话，说全守夜人部队里最丑的两个都给派到他手下，只因为他瞎了眼，省得受罪。克莱达斯矮个子，秃头，几乎没下巴，长了一双粉红色的小眼睛，活像只鼹鼠。齐特脖子上长了个鸽子蛋那么大的瘤，脸上则布满疮和疙瘩。或许正因如此，无论何时他看起来总是怒气冲冲。
It was Chett who answered Jon’s knock. “I need to speak to Maester Aemon,” Jon told him.
来应门的是齐特。“我有事找伊蒙师傅。”琼恩告诉他。
“The maester is abed, as you should be. Come back on the morrow and maybe he’ll see you.” He began to shut the door.
“学士已经睡啦，你也该上床了。明天再来看他愿不愿见你罢。”说完他准备关门。
Jon jammed it open with his boot. “I need to speak to him now. The morning will be too late.”
琼恩伸脚卡住门。“我现在就要跟他谈，等明早就太迟了。”
Chett scowled. “The maester is not accustomed to being woken in the night. Do you know how old he is?”
齐特皱眉道：“学士可不习惯没事给人半夜吵醒。你知道他年纪多大了吗？”
“Old enough to treat visitors with more courtesy than you,” Jon said. “Give him my pardons. I would not disturb his rest if it were not important.”
“我知道他年纪大，比你更懂待客之道。”琼恩说，“请代我向他致歉，若非情况紧急，我决不会打扰他休息的。”
“And if I refuse?”
“如果我拒绝呢？”
Jon had his boot wedged solidly in the door. “I can stand here all night if I must.”
琼恩把脚稳稳地卡在门缝间。“我可以就这样站上整夜。”
The black brother made a disgusted noise and opened the door to admit him. “Wait in the library. There’s wood. Start a fire. I won’t have the maester catching a chill on account of you.”
黑衣弟兄嫌恶地哼了一声，然后打开门让他进去。“到图书室去等。那边有木材，去生个火。我可不会让学士因为你的关系着凉。”
Jon had the logs crackling merrily by the time Chett led in Maester Aemon. The old man was clad in his bed robe, but around his throat was the chain collar of his order. A maester did not remove it even to sleep. “The chair beside the fire would be pleasant,” he said when he felt the warmth on his face. When he was settled comfortably, Chett covered his legs with a fur and went to stand by the door.
等齐特领着伊蒙师傅进来，琼恩已经生起一炉劈啪作响的柴火。老人穿着睡袍，颈间依然挂着象征身份的锁链。即便睡觉，学士也不能取下。“我坐炉边那张椅子就好。”他大概是察觉到暖意，便这么说。等他舒服地坐下，齐特拿了张毛皮帮他盖住双脚，然后走到门边站定。
“I am sorry to have woken you, Maester,” Jon Snow said.
“学士，这么晚还吵醒您，真是抱歉。”琼恩·雪诺道。
“You did not wake me,” Maester Aemon replied. “I find I need less sleep as I grow older, and I am grown very old. I often spend half the night with ghosts, remembering times fifty years past as if they were yesterday. The mystery of a midnight visitor is a welcome diversion. So tell me, Jon Snow, why have you come calling at this strange hour?”
“你并没有吵醒我，”伊蒙师傅回答，“我发现年纪越大，睡眠的需求就越少，而我已经很老了。我时常大半夜与过去的鬼魂为伍，回忆起五十年前的往事，恍如昨日。因此三更半夜的神秘访客，也算件不错的事。那么告诉我，琼恩·雪诺，这时候跑来找我，究竟有什么事？”
“To ask that Samwell Tarly be taken from training and accepted as a brother of the Night’s Watch.”
“我想请您让山姆威尔·塔利结束训练，正式加入守夜人弟兄的行列。”
“This is no concern of Maester Aemon,” Chett complained.
“那不干伊蒙学士的事。”齐特抱怨。
“Our Lord Commander has given the training of recruits into the hands of Ser Alliser Thorne,” the maester said gently. “Only he may say when a boy is ready to swear his vow, as you surely know. Why then come to me?”
“总司令把训练新兵的事务交给艾里沙·索恩爵士负责，”师傅温和地说，“只有他才能决定某个孩子够不够格宣誓加入，这你想必也清楚。你为什么还来找我？”
“The Lord Commander listens to you,” Jon told him. “And the wounded and the sick of the Night’s Watch are in your charge.”
“因为总司令会听从您的建议，”琼恩告诉他，“更何况守夜人弟兄若有病痛伤患，也都由您照料。”
“And is your friend Samwell wounded or sick?”
“这么说来，你这位山姆威尔·塔利可有病痛伤患？”
“He will be,” Jon promised, “unless you help.”
“他很快就会有，”琼恩向他保证，“除非您能伸出援手。”
He told them all of it, even the part where he’d set Ghost at Rast’s throat. Maester Aemon listened silently, blind eyes fixed on the fire, but Chett’s face darkened with each word. “Without us to keep him safe, Sam will have no chance,” Jon finished. “He’s hopeless with a sword. My sister Arya could tear him apart, and she’s not yet ten. If Ser Alliser makes him fight, it’s only a matter of time before he’s hurt or killed.”
他一五一十地把事情真相说出来，连放白灵去对付雷斯特的部分也没漏掉。伊蒙师傅静静地倾听，盲昧的双眼朝向炉火，然而齐特的眼神却随着他说的每一个字越显阴沉。“没有我们保护，山姆绝对撑不下去。”琼恩收了尾，“他对舞刀弄剑一窍不通。连我妹妹艾莉亚都能把他大卸八块，而她还不满十岁。假如艾里沙爵士强迫他打斗，他早晚会受伤，甚至被杀。”
Chett could stand no more. “I’ve seen this fat boy in the common hall,” he said. “He is a pig, and a hopeless craven as well, if what you say is true.”
齐特听不下去了。“我在大厅里见过这肥小子，”他说，“他分明就是条猪，如果你说的是实话，那他还是个无可救药的胆小鬼。”
“Maybe it is so,” Maester Aemon said. “Tell me, Chett, what would you have us do with such a boy?”
“或许真是如此，”伊蒙师傅道，“齐特，你倒是说说，我们该拿这孩子怎么办？”
“Leave him where he is,” Chett said. “The Wall is no place for the weak. Let him train until he is ready, no matter how many years that takes. Ser Alliser shall make a man of him or kill him, as the gods will.”
“别理他，”齐特说，“长城本来就不是软脚虾该来的地方。就让他继续受训，直到他够格为止，管他要训练多少年。老天有眼，艾里沙爵士要嘛把他变成个男人，不然就把他杀掉。”
“That’s stupid,” Jon said. He took a deep breath to gather his thoughts. “I remember once I asked Maester Luwin why he wore a chain around his throat.”
“这种作法太愚蠢了，”琼恩道。他深吸一口气，稍稍整理思绪。“记得我曾听鲁温师傅解释过他为什么要始终戴着颈链。”
Maester Aemon touched his own collar lightly, his bony, wrinkled finger stroking the heavy metal links. “Go on.”
伊蒙师傅伸出骨瘦如柴，满是皱纹的手指轻抚着他沉重的项圈。“继续说。”
“He told me that a maester’s collar is made of chain to remind him that he is sworn to serve,” Jon said, remembering. “I asked why each link was a different metal. A silver chain would look much finer with his grey robes, I said. Maester Luwin laughed. A maester forges his chain with study, he told me. The different metals are each a different kind of learning, gold for the study of money and accounts, silver for healing, iron for warcraft. And he said there were other meanings as well. The collar is supposed to remind a maester of the realm he serves, isn’t that so? Lords are gold and knights steel, but two links can’t make a chain. You also need silver and iron and lead, tin and copper and bronze and all the rest, and those are farmers and smiths and merchants and the like. A chain needs all sorts of metals, and a land needs all sorts of people.”
“他告诉我学士的颈链是用来提醒自己立下的誓言，”琼恩边回忆边说，“然后我追问他为什么每个环节都要用不同的金属，我说如果换成银链，搭配他的灰袍一定更出彩。鲁温师傅笑着告诉我：锁链乃是随着学士的知识渐长而逐一打造。不同的金属，代表不同领域的知识，黄金代表财务会计，白银象征救死扶伤，钢铁则是军事知识。他说除此之外，锁链还有别的意义。戴着锁链，可以随时提醒学士所服务的王国，对不对？想想看，如果说贵族老爷是黄金，骑士是钢铁，但光这两个金属环无法连成一条锁链，你还需要白银、铁和铅，锡、红铜和青铜，以及其他金属，他们象征着农夫、工匠等等各行各业的人。一条锁链需要各种金属，正如一个国家需要形形色色的人。”
Maester Aemon smiled. “And so?”
伊蒙师傅微笑道：“所以呢？”
“The Night’s Watch needs all sorts too. Why else have rangers and stewards and builders? Lord Randyll couldn’t make Sam a warrior, and Ser Alliser won’t either. You can’t hammer tin into iron, no matter how hard you beat it, but that doesn’t mean tin is useless. Why shouldn’t Sam be a steward?”
“守夜人也是如此，不然干嘛区分游骑兵、事务官和工匠呢？蓝道大人无法把山姆训练成战士，艾里沙爵士也不会有办法。无论你多用力，也不能把锡打成铁，但这不代表锡就没用。为什么不让山姆当个事务官呢？”
Chett gave an angry scowl. “I’m a steward. You think it’s easy work, fit for cowards? The order of stewards keeps the Watch alive. We hunt and farm, tend the horses, milk the cows, gather firewood, cook the meals. Who do you think makes your clothing? Who brings up supplies from the south? The stewards.”
齐特愤怒地绷着脸道：“我自己就是个事务官，你以为这是轻松差事，可以随便拿给胆小鬼做？守夜人日子过得下去，全靠我们事务官打猎种田、养马养牛，还有捡柴烧饭。你以为你穿的衣服是谁缝的？补给品又是谁从南方运来的？告诉你，通通是事务官。”
Maester Aemon was gentler. “Is your friend a hunter?”
伊蒙师傅的反应比较温和。“你这位朋友打猎技术如何？”
“He hates hunting,” Jon had to admit.
“他痛恨打猎。”琼恩不得不承认。
“Can he plow a field?” the maester asked. “Can he drive a wagon or sail a ship? Could he butcher a cow?”
“那他会犁田吗？”学士问：“他能驾车开船吗？会不会杀牛呢？”
“No.”
“都不会。”
Chett gave a nasty laugh. “I’ve seen what happens to soft lordlings when they’re put to work. Set them to churning butter and their hands blister and bleed. Give them an axe to split logs, and they cut off their own foot.”
齐特阴险地笑道：“我见过像他这种软弱的小少爷被派去做事时是什么德行。叫他们搅个奶油，就弄得皮破血流。叫他们拿斧头劈柴，就把自己的脚给砍了。”
“I know one thing Sam could do better than anyone.”
“我知道有件事山姆做得比谁都好。”
“Yes?” Maester Aemon prompted.
“是什么？”伊蒙学士提问。
Jon glanced warily at Chett, standing beside the door, his boils red and angry. “He could help you,” he said quickly. “He can do sums, and he knows how to read and write. I know Chett can’t read, and Clydas has weak eyes. Sam read every book in his father’s library. He’d be good with the ravens too. Animals seem to like him. Ghost took to him straight off. There’s a lot he could do, besides fighting. The Night’s Watch needs every man. Why kill one, to no end? Make use of him instead.”
琼恩警觉地看看站在门边，面疮发红，满脸怒意的齐特。“他可以帮您的忙，”他很快地说，“他懂算术，也会读书写字。我知道齐特不识字，克莱达斯眼睛又不好。山姆把他父亲的藏书都读遍了。他跟乌鸦应该会处得来，动物似乎都很喜欢他，白灵一见他就对他很有好感。除了打架，他能做的事很多。守夜人军团需要每一种人，何苦不为什么就杀掉一个呢？不如知人善任。”
Maester Aemon closed his eyes, and for a brief moment Jon was afraid that he had gone to sleep. Finally he said, “Maester Luwin taught you well, Jon Snow. Your mind is as deft as your blade, it would seem.”
伊蒙学士闭上眼睛，琼恩一时还担心他睡着，但最后他开了口：“琼恩·雪诺，鲁温学士把你调教得很好。看来你的心思和你的剑一样灵敏。”
“Does that mean …?”
“您的意思是……？”
“It means I shall think on what you have said,” the maester told him firmly. “And now, I believe I am ready to sleep. Chett, show our young brother to the door.”
“我会仔细想想你的话，”学士语气坚定地告诉他，“现在嘛，我准备睡了。齐特，送这位年轻弟兄出去。”
*TYRION
第四十三章 提利昂
T hey had taken shelter beneath a copse of aspens just off the high road. Tyrion was gathering dead-wood while their horses took water from a mountain stream. He stooped to pick up a splintered branch and examined it critically. “Will this do? I am not practiced at starting fires. Morrec did that for me.”
他们在紧邻山路的山杨树丛下稍事休息。提利昂捡拾枯枝，马匹则啜饮山泉。他俯身拿起一根断裂的枝干仔细审视。“这个行吗？我对生火这事儿不在行，以前都是莫里斯帮我弄的。”
“A fire?” Bronn said, spitting. “Are you so hungry to die, dwarf? Or have you taken leave of your senses? A fire will bring the clansmen down on us from miles around. I mean to survive this journey, Lannister.”
“生火？”波隆啐了口唾沫，“侏儒，你急着找死不成？还是你走得连理智都没啦？生火会把方圆好几里的原住民通通吸引过来。兰尼斯特，我还想活着走完这趟路呢。”
“And how do you hope to do that?” Tyrion asked. He tucked the branch under his arm and poked around through the sparse undergrowth, looking for more. His back ached from the effort of bending; they had been riding since daybreak, when a stone-faced Ser Lyn Corbray had ushered them through the Bloody Gate and commanded them never to return.
“那你倒是打算怎么办？”提利昂问。他把树枝夹在腋下，继续在稀疏的灌木丛中翻找。天刚亮，林恩·科布瑞爵士便铁青着脸把他们送出血门，并明令禁止他们再度出现，从那时起，他俩便快马加鞭地赶路，直到现在还没歇息，害得他腰酸背痛。
“We have no chance of fighting our way back,” Bronn said, “but two can cover more ground than ten, and attract less notice. The fewer days we spend in these mountains, the more like we are to reach the riverlands. Ride hard and fast, I say. Travel by night and hole up by day, avoid the road where we can, make no noise and light no fires.”
“靠蛮干杀出重围是别想了，”波隆道，“但两个人轻装便行，总比大批人马速度快，也较不会引人注意。我们在山里停留的时间越短，就越有机会安全抵达河间地带。所以我说咱们应该加紧赶路，白天躲藏，夜间行动，道路能避就避，不要发出噪音，更不要生火。”
Tyrion Lannister sighed. “A splendid plan, Bronn. Try it, as you like … and forgive me if I do not linger to bury you.”
提利昂·兰尼斯特叹道：“波隆，这计划真是好极了。那你就自己去试试罢……到时候可别怪我没停下来帮你挖坟。”
“You think to outlive me , dwarf?” The sellsword grinned. He had a dark gap in his smile where the edge of Ser Vardis Egen’s shield had cracked a tooth in half.
“你这侏儒想活得比我久？”佣兵嘿嘿笑道。他的笑容有个缺口，正是瓦狄斯·伊根爵士的盾牌撞掉他一颗牙齿的地方。
Tyrion shrugged. “Riding hard and fast by night is a sure way to tumble down a mountain and crack your skull. I prefer to make my crossing slow and easy. I know you love the taste of horse, Bronn, but if our mounts die under us this time, we’ll be trying to saddle shadowcats … and if truth be told, I think the clans will find us no matter what we do. Their eyes are all around us.” He swept a gloved hand over the high, wind-carved crags that surrounded them.
提利昂耸耸肩。“你要在夜间加紧赶路，这简直就是想摔破脑袋。我宁可慢慢走，舒舒服服地走。波隆，我知道你爱吃马肉，但这回要是我的马死了，咱俩就只剩影子山猫可骑了……老实说，我认为不管我们怎么做，原住民都会找上我们。这里四处都是他们的眼线。”他伸出戴了手套的手，朝周围风蚀的高耸峭壁挥挥。
Bronn grimaced. “Then we’re dead men, Lannister.”
波隆皱眉道：“兰尼斯特，那我们就跟死人没两样了。”
“If so, I prefer to die comfortable,” Tyrion replied. “We need a fire. The nights are cold up here, and hot food will warm our bellies and lift our spirits. Do you suppose there’s any game to be had? Lady Lysa has kindly provided us with a veritable feast of salt beef, hard cheese, and stale bread, but I would hate to break a tooth so far from the nearest maester.”
“真那样的话，我也宁愿死得舒服点。”提利昂回答，“我们需要生个火，这里入夜之后冷死人，热腾腾的食物不仅可以温暖咱们的肚皮，还可以提振精神。你觉得这附近能打到什么野味？莱莎夫人好心地给我们准备了丰盛的咸牛肉、硬乳酪和干面包大餐，但我实在不想在这里咬断牙齿，你知道，要找学士还有得走咧。”
“I can find meat.” Beneath a fall of black hair, Bronn’s dark eyes regarded Tyrion suspiciously. “I should leave you here with your fool’s fire. If I took your horse, I’d have twice the chance to make it through. What would you do then, dwarf?”
“我能弄到肉，”一绺黑发之下，波隆的黑眼睛狐疑地打量着提利昂。“但我首先应该把你和这堆笨柴火丢在这里，如果我把你的马也带走，那我逃脱的机会就会加倍。到时候你会怎么做呢，侏儒先生？”
“Die, most like.” Tyrion stooped to get another stick.
“八成是死啰。”提利昂弯腰捡起另一根木棍。
“You don’t think I’d do it?”
“你觉得我不会这么做？”
“You’d do it in an instant, if it meant your life. You were quick enough to silence your friend Chiggen when he caught that arrow in his belly.” Bronn had yanked back the man’s head by the hair and driven the point of his dirk in under the ear, and afterward told Catelyn Stark that the other sellsword had died of his wound.
“如果攸关性命，你会毫不犹豫这么做。当初你朋友契根肚子中箭，你不就动作飞快，一刀把他宰了？”当时波隆抓住他的头发往后一扯，匕首从他耳朵贯穿而进，事后他却对凯特琳·史塔克说他的佣兵同伴死于箭伤。
“He was good as dead,” Bronn said, “and his moaning was bringing them down on us. Chiggen would have done the same for me … and he was no friend, only a man I rode with. Make no mistake, dwarf. I fought for you, but I do not love you.”
“反正他也活不成，”波隆道，“更何况他大呼小叫个不停，把敌人都引来了。那天受伤的换做我，契根也会同样行为……何况他算不上朋友，只是同行的伙伴。侏儒，你给我搞清楚，我帮你杀人，但那不代表我喜欢你。”
“It was your blade I needed,” Tyrion said, “not your love.” He dumped his armful of wood on the ground.
“我也只需要你帮我杀人，”提利昂说，“用不着你喜欢我。”他把怀中的木材扔到地上。
Bronn grinned. “You’re bold as any sellsword, I’ll give you that. How did you know I’d take your part?”
波隆嘿嘿一笑。“我得承认，你胆子够大，不输咱们佣兵。你怎么知道我会替你出场？”
“Know?” Tyrion squatted awkwardly on his stunted legs to build the fire. “I tossed the dice. Back at the inn, you and Chiggen helped take me captive. Why? The others saw it as their duty, for the honor of the lords they served, but not you two. You had no lord, no duty, and precious little honor, so why trouble to involve yourselves?” He took out his knife and whittled some thin strips of bark off one of the sticks he’d gathered, to serve as kindling. “Well, why do sellswords do anything? For gold. You were thinking Lady Catelyn would reward you for your help, perhaps even take you into her service. Here, that should do, I hope. Do you have a flint?”
“我哪儿知道？”提利昂瘸着腿试图生火。“我是孤注一掷。之前在旅店里，你和契根跟他们一道把我抓住，图什么？其他人要么是因为职责所在，要么是为了主子的名誉，但你俩不是。你既没有主子，也没有义务，更没有什么宝贝荣誉，何苦没事找事？”他取出刀子，削掉一根木棍的树皮，用来当引信。“喏，佣兵是为什么做事啊？还不是为了钱。你们以为凯特琳夫人会奖赏你们的协助，甚至给你们谋个差事。好了，我想这样应该就行了。你有没有打火石？”
Bronn slid two fingers into the pouch at his belt and tossed down a flint. Tyrion caught it in the air.
波隆伸出两根手指滑进腰间的小袋，丢出一块打火石。提利昂在半空中接住。
“My thanks,” he said. “The thing is, you did not know the Starks. Lord Eddard is a proud, honorable, and honest man, and his lady wife is worse. Oh, no doubt she would have found a coin or two for you when this was all over, and pressed it in your hand with a polite word and a look of distaste, but that’s the most you could have hoped for. The Starks look for courage and loyalty and honor in the men they choose to serve them, and if truth be told, you and Chiggen were lowborn scum.” Tyrion struck the flint against his dagger, trying for a spark. Nothing.
“谢啦。”他说，“问题在于你不了解史塔克家的人。艾德大人既骄傲，又正直，凡事讲求荣誉，而他夫人嘛就更别提了。喏，等事情结束后她当然会赏你两个小钱，带着嫌恶的眼神，一边把钱塞到你手里，一边说几句礼貌的话，但别指望她会给更多啦。史塔克家要的是有忠诚有勇气，还得讲究荣誉的人，而你和契根嘛，老实说，不过是出身低贱的人渣。”提利昂拿燧石敲击匕首想生火，却什么也没弄出来。
Bronn snorted. “You have a bold tongue, little man. One day someone is like to cut it out and make you eat it.”
波隆哼了一声。“小家伙，我看你这舌头挺毒的，小心哪天给人割了叫你吞下肚去。”
“Everyone tells me that.” Tyrion glanced up at the sellsword. “Did I offend you? My pardons … but you are scum, Bronn, make no mistake. Duty, honor, friendship, what’s that to you? No, don’t trouble yourself, we both know the answer. Still, you’re not stupid. Once we reached the Vale, Lady Stark had no more need of you … but I did, and the one thing the Lannisters have never lacked for is gold. When the moment came to toss the dice, I was counting on your being smart enough to know where your best interest lay. Happily for me, you did.” He slammed stone and steel together again, fruitlessly.
“别人都这么说。”提利昂瞄瞄佣兵。“我冒犯到你了吗？那还真对不住……不过哩，波隆，你也搞清楚，你的的确确是个人渣。责任感、荣誉心、友谊，哪一样是你有的？哼，不用费工夫想了，答案咱俩都知道。可你不蠢，我们抵达峡谷之后，史塔克夫人就用不着你了……但我用得着，何况兰尼斯特家的人从不吝惜金子。所以，当我需要孤注一掷时，我就是猜你够机灵，知道怎么做对你最有利。让我很高兴的是，你的确够机灵。”他将打火石和刀刃再度撞击，却依旧徒劳无功。
“Here,” said Bronn, squatting, “I’ll do it.” He took the knife and flint from Tyrion’s hands and struck sparks on his first try. A curl of bark began to smolder.
“拿来，”波隆蹲下身，“让我来。”他从提利昂手里接过短刀和燧石，一打便擦出火花。一块卷起的树皮开始冒烟。
“Well done,” Tyrion said. “Scum you may be, but you’re undeniably useful, and with a sword in your hand you’re almost as good as my brother Jaime. What do you want, Bronn? Gold? Land? Women? Keep me alive, and you’ll have it.”
“干得好。”提利昂道，“你虽然是个人渣，但不可否认你很有用。手里再拿把剑，你就跟我老哥詹姆差不多厉害。波隆，你想要什么？金子？土地？还是女人？只要想办法保全我性命，你要什么有什么。”
Bronn blew gently on the fire, and the flames leapt up higher. “And if you die?”
波隆朝火堆轻轻吹气，火焰顿时跃得老高。“万一你死了怎么办？”
“Why then, I’ll have one mourner whose grief is sincere,” Tyrion said, grinning. “The gold ends when I do.”
“那样嘛，起码有了个真心诚意为我哀悼的人。”提利昂嘻嘻笑道，“我挂了，金子也就没啰。”
The fire was blazing up nicely. Bronn stood, tucked the flint back into his pouch, and tossed Tyrion his dagger. “Fair enough,” he said. “My sword’s yours, then … but don’t go looking for me to bend the knee and m’lord you every time you take a shit. I’m no man’s toady.”
这时火已经烧得很旺。波隆起身，把燧石塞进口袋，然后将匕首抛回给提利昂。“算你公道，”他说，“我的剑是你的了……但别叫我来卑躬屈膝、满口老爷大人那套，我不当别人的仆从。”
“Nor any man’s friend,” Tyrion said. “I’ve no doubt you’d betray me as quick as you did Lady Stark, if you saw a profit in it. If the day ever comes when you’re tempted to sell me out, remember this, Bronn—I’ll match their price, whatever it is. I like living. And now, do you think you could do something about finding us some supper?”
“你也不当别人的朋友，”提利昂道，“我很清楚一旦有利可图，你会义无返顾地背叛我，就跟你背叛史塔克夫人一样。波隆，要是哪天真有人引诱你出卖我，请你记住——不管对方出价多少，我都付得起。说穿了，就是我很爱惜我这条命。好啦，那你现在到底能不能帮咱们弄点好吃的？”
“Take care of the horses,” Bronn said, unsheathing the long dirk he wore at his hip. He strode into the trees.
“你把马照顾好。”波隆说着解开系在身后的猎刀，大步走进树林。
An hour later the horses had been rubbed down and fed, the fire was crackling away merrily, and a haunch of a young goat was turning above the flames, spitting and hissing. “All we lack now is some good wine to wash down our kid,” Tyrion said.
一个小时后，马匹已经刷洗喂饱，营火也烧得劈啪作响，火上的烤架正转着一只小山羊，滴下油汁，香气四溢。“现在只差一瓶好酒配着下肚啦。”提利昂说。
“That, a woman, and another dozen swords,” Bronn said. He sat cross-legged beside the fire, honing the edge of his longsword with an oilstone. There was something strangely reassuring about the rasping sound it made when he drew it down the steel. “It will be full dark soon,” the sellsword pointed out. “I’ll take first watch … for all the good it will do us. It might be kinder to let them kill us in our sleep.”
“还要来个女人，最好再多十来个士兵保护我们。”波隆道。他两脚盘坐在火边，正拿油石磨长剑。石头和金属摩擦所发出的刺耳声响有种怪异的安全感。“很快天就要全黑，”佣兵表示，“第一班我来值……虽然没什么用，好歹待会儿我可以死在睡梦中。”
“Oh, I imagine they’ll be here long before it comes to sleep.” The smell of the roasting meat made Tyrion’s mouth water.
“喔，我看用不着等到睡着，他们就会过来了。”闻着烤肉的香气，提利昂不禁口水直流。
Bronn watched him across the fire. “You have a plan,” he said flatly, with a scrape of steel on stone.
波隆隔着营火盯着他。“你有打算。”他平板地说，石头又磨了剑一下。
“A hope, call it,” Tyrion said. “Another toss of the dice.”
“不妨说有一丝希望罢，”提利昂道，“又到孤注一掷的时候了。”
“With our lives as the stake?”
“你拿咱俩的性命当赌注？”
Tyrion shrugged. “What choice do we have?” He leaned over the fire and sawed a thin slice of meat from the kid. “Ahhhh,” he sighed happily as he chewed. Grease ran down his chin. “A bit tougher than I’d like, and in want of spicing, but I’ll not complain too loudly. If I were back at the Eyrie, I’d be dancing on a precipice in hopes of a boiled bean.”
提利昂耸耸肩。“难道有别的选择？”他伸手从火上割下一小片羊肉。“啊。”他一边咀嚼，一边开心地感叹。油汁从他两颊滴下。“虽然有点硬，又没有酱料，但我还是不抱怨的好。之前在鹰巢城，我在断崖边跳来跳去，连一粒煮豆子都吃不到哩。”
“And yet you gave the turnkey a purse of gold,” Bronn said.
“结果你却给了那狱卒一袋金子。”波隆说。
“A Lannister always pays his debts.”
“兰尼斯特有债必还。”
Even Mord had scarcely believed it when Tyrion tossed him the leather purse. The gaoler’s eyes had gone big as boiled eggs as he yanked open the drawstring and beheld the glint of gold. “I kept the silver,” Tyrion had told him with a crooked smile, “but you were promised the gold, and there it is.” It was more than a man like Mord could hope to earn in a lifetime of abusing prisoners. “And remember what I said, this is only a taste. If you ever grow tired of Lady Arryn’s service, present yourself at Casterly Rock, and I’ll pay you the rest of what I owe you.” With golden dragons spilling out of both hands, Mord had fallen to his knees and promised that he would do just that.
当提利昂把装了金子的皮袋扔给莫德时，连莫德自己都难以置信。狱卒松开袋口的绳子，看到耀眼黄金，两眼睁得像煮蛋那么大。“我把银币留了下来，”提利昂对他歪嘴一笑。“我们本来就说好给金子，所以就成交啰。”那笔钱是莫德欺负一辈子犯人都挣不到的数目。“还有，别忘记我说过，这些只是开胃小菜。哪天你要是觉得烦，不想继续为艾林夫人做事，就到凯岩城来，到时候我再把欠你的算清。”眼看两手盛满金龙币，莫德当场就双脚跪下，保证他一定会照办。
Bronn yanked out his dirk and pulled the meat from the fire. He began to carve thick chunks of charred meat off the bone as Tyrion hollowed out two heels of stale bread to serve as trenchers. “If we do reach the river, what will you do then?” the sellsword asked as he cut.
波隆抽出匕首，将肉从火堆上拿下，开始从骨头上切下一块块烤得焦黑的肉，提利昂则挖空两块硬面包充当盘子。“假如我们真能回到河间地，你打算做什么？”佣兵边切边问。
“Oh, a whore and a featherbed and a flagon of wine, for a start.” Tyrion held out his trencher, and Bronn filled it with meat. “And then to Casterly Rock or King’s Landing, I think. I have some questions that want answering, concerning a certain dagger.”
“喏，先找个妓女，弄张羽毛床，来壶好酒再说。”提和昂递出盘子，波隆将之装满肉块。“然后再决定去凯岩城或者君临，等我想想，关于某把匕首，可有好些问题要问呢。”
The sellsword chewed and swallowed. “So you were telling it true? It was not your knife?”
佣兵咀嚼吞咽着满口烤肉。“这么说来你没撒谎？那真不是你的刀子？”
Tyrion smiled thinly. “Do I look a liar to you?”
提利昂挤出一丝微笑。“你觉得我看起来可像个骗子？”
By the time their bellies were full, the stars had come out and a half-moon was rising over the mountains. Tyrion spread his shadowskin cloak on the ground and stretched out with his saddle for a pillow. “Our friends are taking their sweet time.”
待他们填饱肚子，夜空已群星密布，一弯新月升上山头。提利昂将他的山猫皮披风铺在地上，拿马鞍当枕头。“等啊等啊，咱们朋友还没动静，真是好事多磨。”
“If I were them, I’d fear a trap,” Bronn said. “Why else would we be so open, if not to lure them in?”
“换做是我，也会担心其中有诈，”波隆道，“要不是有陷阱，干嘛这样大刺刺的？”
Tyrion chuckled. “Then we ought to sing and send them fleeing in terror.” He began to whistle a tune.
提利昂咯咯笑道：“那我们岂不更该唱歌跳舞，好把他们通通吓跑啰。”说完他哼起了小调。
“You’re mad, dwarf,” Bronn said as he cleaned the grease out from under his nails with his dirk.
“侏儒，你真是疯了。”波隆边说边用匕首剔除指甲缝里的油脂。
“Where’s your love of music, Bronn?”
“波隆，你对音乐的喜好都到哪儿去啦？”
“If it was music you wanted, you should have gotten the singer to champion you.”
“你要音乐，当初干嘛不叫那唱歌的当你打手？”
Tyrion grinned. “That would have been amusing. I can just see him fending off Ser Vardis with his woodharp.” He resumed his whistling. “Do you know this song?” he asked.
提利昂嘻笑道：“那一定很有趣。想想他拿竖琴对付瓦狄斯爵士会是什么情景。”他继续哼唱着。“知不知道这曲儿？”他问。
“You hear it here and there, in inns and whorehouses.”
“听得烦了，在旅店或妓院里常听到。”
“Myrish. ‘The Seasons of My Love.’ Sweet and sad, if you understand the words. The first girl I ever bedded used to sing it, and I’ve never been able to put it out of my head.” Tyrion gazed up at the sky. It was a clear cold night and the stars shone down upon the mountains as bright and merciless as truth. “I met her on a night like this,” he heard himself saying. “Jaime and I were riding back from Lannisport when we heard a scream, and she came running out into the road with two men dogging her heels, shouting threats. My brother unsheathed his sword and went after them, while I dismounted to protect the girl. She was scarcely a year older than I was, dark-haired, slender, with a face that would break your heart. It certainly broke mine. Lowborn, half-starved, unwashed … yet lovely. They’d torn the rags she was wearing half off her back, so I wrapped her in my cloak while Jaime chased the men into the woods. By the time he came trotting back, I’d gotten a name out of her, and a story. She was a crofter’s child, orphaned when her father died of fever, on her way to … well, nowhere, really.
“这是密尔的歌谣，叫做‘我的恋爱季节’。如果你知道歌词，就会明白写得有多么甜美哀怨。我睡过的第一个女孩子以前常唱这首歌，想忘也忘不掉。”提利昂抬头仰视星空。这是个清朗的寒夜，群星的光辉洒在山间，明亮无情有如真理。“我遇见她的那晚就和现在一模一样，”他听见自己说，“当时詹姆和我正从兰尼斯港骑马回来，只听一声尖叫，就见她朝路上跑来，后面跟了两个大呼小叫的男人。我老哥拔剑去对付他们，我则下马保护女孩。她只大我不到一岁，黑头发，很纤细，那张脸教你看了就心碎。最起码我的心碎了。虽然她出身低贱，又一副营养不良的样子，也很久没洗澡……但就是讨人喜欢。那两个男的先前已经扯开了她穿的破布，背几乎都露了出来，所以我用自己的斗篷裹住她，詹姆则把那两个家伙赶回森林里。等他跑回来，我已经问出了她的名字和身世。她是个农夫的女儿，自从她爹发烧病死后就孤伶伶一个人，正准备去……唉，其实要去哪儿她自己也不知道。”
“Jaime was all in a lather to hunt down the men. It was not often outlaws dared prey on travelers so near to Casterly Rock, and he took it as an insult. The girl was too frightened to send off by herself, though, so I offered to take her to the closest inn and feed her while my brother rode back to the Rock for help.
“当时詹姆一心只想逮着那两个人。强盗居然敢在距离凯岩城这么近的地方攻击行人，这可不是件寻常事，他把这当成奇耻大辱。那女孩惊慌失措，不敢一个人走路，于是我提议带她到附近的旅馆，弄点东西给她吃，而我老哥则回凯岩城讨救兵。”
“She was hungrier than I would have believed. We finished two whole chickens and part of a third, and drank a flagon of wine, talking. I was only thirteen, and the wine went to my head, I fear. The next thing I knew, I was sharing her bed. If she was shy, I was shyer. I’ll never know where I found the courage. When I broke her maidenhead, she wept, but afterward she kissed me and sang her little song, and by morning I was in love.”
“她比我原先料想的更饿。我俩足足吃了两只半烤鸡，又喝干了一整壶酒，边吃边聊很愉快。那年我才十三岁，只怕一喝酒就乱了性。总之等我回过神来，已经跟她躺在床上。她很害羞，但我更害羞，真不知我是打哪儿来的勇气？我给她开苞的时候她哭了，但事后她吻了我，然后悄声唱起那首歌，到第二天清晨，我已经爱上她了。”
“You?” Bronn’s voice was amused.
“你爱上她了？”波隆的语气听来饶富兴味。
“Absurd, isn’t it?” Tyrion began to whistle the song again. “I married her,” he finally admitted.
“很可笑，对不对？”提利昂又哼起那首歌。“后来我还娶了她。”最后他终于承认。
“A Lannister of Casterly Rock wed to a crofter’s daughter,” Bronn said. “How did you manage that?”
“兰尼斯特家的人娶个农家女？”波隆说，“真有你的。”
“Oh, you’d be astonished at what a boy can make of a few lies, fifty pieces of silver, and a drunken septon. I dared not bring my bride home to Casterly Rock, so I set her up in a cottage of her own, and for a fortnight we played at being man and wife. And then the septon sobered and confessed all to my lord father.” Tyrion was surprised at how desolate it made him feel to say it, even after all these years. Perhaps he was just tired. “That was the end of my marriage.” He sat up and stared at the dying fire, blinking at the light.
“唉，讲几句谎话，口袋里装上五十枚银币，再找个喝醉酒的修士，一个小男孩能干些什么，说了你大概都不相信。我不敢把我的新娘带回凯岩城，就把她安顿在她自己的小屋里，咱俩过了两个星期的夫妻生活。最后那修士酒醒，便把事情前后通通禀报给我公爵老爸。”过了这么多年，讲起这件事竟依旧让提利昂倍感孤寂，他实在大感意外。或许只是旅途困顿的关系罢。“我的婚姻到此结束。”他坐起身，凝视着逐渐熄灭的篝火，就着光亮眨眼。
“He sent the girl away?”
“他把那女孩赶走了？”
“He did better than that,” Tyrion said. “First he made my brother tell me the truth. The girl was a whore, you see. Jaime arranged the whole affair, the road, the outlaws, all of it. He thought it was time I had a woman. He paid double for a maiden, knowing it would be my first time.
“他做得更漂亮，”提利昂道，“他先要我老哥跟我说实话。其实……那女孩是个妓女。从那条路到那两个强盗，整件事都是詹姆安排好的。他认为让我体验男女之事的时刻到了，便精心策划了这一切。这是我的第一次，所以他特意付了双倍的价钱找了个处女。”
“After Jaime had made his confession, to drive home the lesson, Lord Tywin brought my wife in and gave her to his guards. They paid her fair enough. A silver for each man, how many whores command that high a price? He sat me down in the corner of the barracks and bade me watch, and at the end she had so many silvers the coins were slipping through her fingers and rolling on the floor, she …” The smoke was stinging his eyes. Tyrion cleared his throat and turned away from the fire, to gaze out into darkness. “Lord Tywin had me go last,” he said in a quiet voice. “And he gave me a gold coin to pay her, because I was a Lannister, and worth more.”
“詹姆说完之后，为了让我牢牢记取教训，泰温大人把我老婆叫进来，交给他手下的卫兵。说实话，他们出的价挺公道，一人一枚银币，你说多少妓女值这个价？他叫我坐在军营的角落，逼我全程观赏，到后来她赚的银币多得拿不完，白花花的银子顺着指缝洒了一地，而她……”浓烟刺痛了他的眼睛。提利昂清清喉咙，从火边转开，朝黑暗的夜空望去。“泰温大人让我最后一个上。”他轻声说，“他还递给我一枚金币，因为我是兰尼斯特家的人，身价不同。”
After a time he heard the noise again, the rasp of steel on stone as Bronn sharpened his sword. “Thirteen or thirty or three, I would have killed the man who did that to me.”
过了一会儿，他又听见波隆拿石头磨剑的声音。“管我十三岁、三十岁还是三岁，有人敢这样对我，我非宰了他不可。”
Tyrion swung around to face him. “You may get that chance one day. Remember what I told you. A Lannister always pays his debts.” He yawned. “I think I will try and sleep. Wake me if we’re about to die.”
提利昂转头面对他。“说不定哪天你会有机会。记得我跟你说过的话，兰尼斯特有债必还，有仇必报。”他伸个懒腰。“我试着睡一会儿好了。咱们要死的时候记得叫醒我。”
He rolled himself up in the shadowskin and shut his eyes. The ground was stony and cold, but after a time Tyrion Lannister did sleep. He dreamt of the sky cell. This time he was the gaoler, not the prisoner, big , with a strap in his hand, and he was hitting his father, driving him back, toward the abyss …
他用山猫皮披风裹住身子，闭上眼睛。地面凹凸不平，又冷又硬，但没过多久，提利昂·兰尼斯特竟真的睡着了。他梦见了天牢，但这回他是狱卒，并非犯人，而且他身躯高大，手握皮带，正抽打着父亲，逼他后退，逐渐靠近无尽深渊……
“Tyrion.” Bronn’s warning was low and urgent.
“提利昂。”波隆的警告低沉而急促。
Tyrion was awake in the blink of an eye. The fire had burned down to embers, and the shadows were creeping in all around them. Bronn had raised himself to one knee, his sword in one hand and his dirk in the other. Tyrion held up a hand: stay still , it said. “Come share our fire, the night is cold,” he called out to the creeping shadows. “I fear we’ve no wine to offer you, but you’re welcome to some of our goat.”
提利昂立时清醒。营火仅剩余烬，人影正从四面八方朝他们进逼。波隆单膝起立，一手持剑一手握着匕首。提利昂捉住佣兵的手：安静，别轻举妄动。“今晚夜风寒冷，诸位何妨过来一起烤烤火？”他对周围鬼鬼崇祟的人影喊，“虽然我们无酒可以招待，但欢迎各位前来品尝羊肉。”
All movement stopped. Tyrion saw the glint of moonlight on metal. “Our mountain,” a voice called out from the trees, deep and hard and unfriendly. “Our goat.”
所有的动作都停了下来。就着月色，提利昂瞥见金属反射的光泽。“山是我们的，”树丛里传来一个低沉、坚毅而不友善的声音。“羊肉也是我们的。”
“Your goat,” Tyrion agreed. “Who are you?”
“羊肉是你们的没错，”提利昂附和：“你是谁？”
“When you meet your gods,” a different voice replied, “say it was Gunthor son of Gurn of the Stone Crows who sent you to them.” A branch cracked underfoot as he stepped into the light; a thin man in a horned helmet, armed with a long knife.
“当你升天去见你的神的时候，”另一个声音回答，“告诉他送你上天的是石鸦部的冈恩之子冈梭尔。”他踏开树丛，走进光线范围内。来人个子很瘦，带着个牛角盔，手里握着猎刀。
“And Shagga son of Dolf.” That was the first voice, deep and deadly. A boulder shifted to their left, and stood, and became a man. Massive and slow and strong he seemed, dressed all in skins, with a club in his right hand and an axe in his left. He smashed them together as he lumbered closer.
“还有多夫之子夏嘎。”这是头一个声音，低沉而致命。只见一块巨石朝他们左边挪动，然后立起身，变成了人。他的身躯魁梧强壮，看似动作迟缓，全身穿着兽皮，右手拿了根木棍，左手则握着一柄斧头。他脚步笨重地朝他们走来，边走边猛力把两样武器对撞了一下。
Other voices called other names, Conn and Torrek and Jaggot and more that Tyrion forgot the instant he heard them; ten at least. A few had swords and knives; others brandished pitchforks and scythes and wooden spears. He waited until they were done shouting out their names before he gave them answer. “I am Tyrion son of Tywin, of the Clan Lannister, the Lions of the Rock. We will gladly pay you for the goat we ate.”
其他的声音跟着喊出名字，有康恩、托瑞克、贾戈特，还有些名字提利昂记不完全，但对方一共有十人以上。有些拿了刀剑，其他人则挥舞着干草叉、镰刀和树木削的长矛。他直等他们通通报完姓名之后方才回答：“我是兰尼斯特部落的泰温之子提利昂，他是住在凯岩城的狮子酋长。我们很乐意支付吃羊肉的赔偿。”
“What do you have to give us, Tyrion son of Tywin?” asked the one who named himself Gunthor, who seemed to be their chief.
“泰温之子提利昂，你能给我们什么东西呢？”叫冈梭尔的人问。他似乎是这群人的头目。
“There is silver in my purse,” Tyrion told them. “This hauberk I wear is large for me, but it should fit Conn nicely, and the battle-axe I carry would suit Shagga’s mighty hand far better than that wood-axe he holds.”
“我钱包里有些银币，”提利昂告诉他们，“我身上这件锁甲对我来说太大，但康恩穿起来应该很合身。另外呢，我这把战斧要是握在夏嘎那双强壮的手里，肯定会比他那柄木头斧威猛得多。”
“The half man would pay us with our own coin,” said Conn.
“半人想拿我们的东西当赔偿。”康恩道。
“Conn speaks truly,” Gunthor said. “Your silver is ours. Your horses are ours. Your hauberk and your battle-axe and the knife at your belt, those are ours too. You have nothing to give us but your lives. How would you like to die, Tyrion son of Tywin?”
“康恩说得对。”冈梭尔说，“你的银币是我们的，你的马是我们的，你的锁甲和你的战斧，还有你腰上的刀子也都是我们的。你只有一条命可以拿来赔偿。泰温之子提利昂，你想要怎么个死法？”
“In my own bed, with a belly full of wine and a maiden’s mouth around my cock, at the age of eighty,” he replied.
“我想活到八十岁，喝饱一肚子酒，找个处女陪着我，这才死在自己的暖床上。”他回答。
The huge one, Shagga, laughed first and loudest. The others seemed less amused. “Conn, take their horses,” Gunthor commanded. “Kill the other and seize the halfman. He can milk the goats and make the mothers laugh.”
壮硕的夏嘎第一个发笑，声响如雷。其他人则不若他这么觉得有趣。“康恩，去牵马，”冈梭尔下令，“把另外那家伙宰了，然后把半人抓起来。我们可以让他挤羊奶，顺便讨孩子的妈开心。”
Bronn sprang to his feet. “Who dies first?”
波隆一跃起身。“谁想先死？”
“No!” Tyrion said sharply. “Gunthor son of Gurn, hear me. My House is rich and powerful. If the Stone Crows will see us safely through these mountains, my lord father will shower you with gold.”
“住手！”提利昂厉声喝道，“冈恩之子冈梭尔，听我说。我的家族既有钱又有势，只要石鸦部能保我们平安出山，我那公爵老爸赏你们的金子会多到可以拿来洗澡。”
“The gold of a lowland lord is as worthless as a half man’s promises,” Gunthor said.
“低地领主的金子跟半人说的话一样不值钱。”冈梭尔道。
“Half a man I may be,” Tyrion said, “yet I have the courage to face my enemies. What do the Stone Crows do, but hide behind rocks and shiver with fear as the knights of the Vale ride by?”
“我虽然只是半个人，”提利昂说，“却有勇气面对敌人。石鸦部呢？等峡谷骑士来了，你们还不是只敢躲在石头后面，害怕得发抖？”
Shagga gave a roar of anger and clashed club against axe. Jaggot poked at Tyrion’s face with the fire-hardened point of a long wooden spear. He did his best not to flinch. “Are these the best weapons you could steal?” he said. “Good enough for killing sheep, perhaps … if the sheep do not fight back. My father’s smiths shit better steel.”
夏嘎怒吼一声，将手中的棍棒和斧头再度撞击。贾戈特用他那根前端淬过火的木矛戳了戳提利昂的脸。他极尽所能不畏缩。“你们就只偷得到这种货色？”他说，“杀羊或许可以……还得那羊乖乖认命让你们杀。我老爸的铁匠拉出的屎都比这高级。”
“Little boyman,” Shagga roared, “will you mock my axe after I chop off your manhood and feed it to the goats?”
“臭小子，”夏嘎吼道，“等我把你的命根子剁下来喂山羊，瞧你还敢嘲笑我的斧头？”
But Gunthor raised a hand. “No. I would hear his words. The mothers go hungry, and steel fills more mouths than gold. What would you give us for your lives, Tyrion son of Tywin? Swords? Lances? Mail?”
然而冈梭尔举起手。“不，我要听听他怎么说。孩子的妈现在都在挨饿，有了家伙比拿金子更有用。泰温之子提利昂，你要拿什么来换你的命？剑？长枪？还是盔甲？”
“All that, and more, Gunthor son of Gurn,” Tyrion Lannister replied, smiling. “I will give you the Vale of Arryn.”
“冈恩之子冈梭尔，这些都不成问题，我给你的远不止于此，”提利昂·兰尼斯特微笑着回答，“我会把整个艾林谷都送给你。”
*EDDARD
第四十四章 艾德
T hrough the high narrow windows of the Red Keep’s cavernous throne room, the light of sunset spilled across the floor, laying dark red stripes upon the walls where the heads of dragons had once hung. Now the stone was covered with hunting tapestries, vivid with greens and browns and blues, and yet still it seemed to Ned Stark that the only color in the hall was the red of blood.
透过红堡深广王座厅的狭窄高窗，夕阳余晖遍洒地面，为墙壁挂上暗红色的条纹。龙头曾经高悬于此，如今石墙虽已为青绿和棕褐相衬、栩栩如生地描绘狩猎情景的挂毯织锦所覆盖，但在奈德眼中，整个大厅依旧浸润在一片血红之中。
He sat high upon the immense ancient seat of Aegon the Conqueror, an ironwork monstrosity of spikes and jagged edges and grotesquely twisted metal. It was, as Robert had warned him, a hellishly uncomfortable chair, and never more so than now, with his shattered leg throbbing more sharply every minute. The metal beneath him had grown harder by the hour, and the fanged steel behind made it impossible to lean back. A king should never sit easy , Aegon the Conqueror had said, when he commanded his armorers to forge a great seat from the swords laid down by his enemies. Damn Aegon for his arrogance , Ned thought sullenly, and damn Robert and his hunting as well .
他高高坐在“征服者”伊耿宽大而古老的座位上。那是张钢铁铸成，满是狰狞尖刺利角和诡异扭曲金属的椅子，它正如劳勃所警告的那般，是张天杀的不舒服的椅子。眼下他的断腿不住抽痛，这种感觉更是无以复加。他身子底下的金属每一小时都越显坚硬，布满利齿般尖刺的椅背，更教他无法倚靠。当年征服者伊耿命令手下铁匠使用敌人投降时的弃械，镕铸成一张大椅时，曾说：“作国王的不能舒舒服服地坐着”。伊耿这傲慢的家伙该死，奈德阴沉地想，劳勃和他的打猎游戏也该死。
“You are quite certain these were more than brigands?” Varys asked softly from the council table beneath the throne. Grand Maester Pycelle stirred uneasily beside him, while Littlefinger toyed with a pen. They were the only councillors in attendance. A white hart had been sighted in the kingswood, and Lord Renly and Ser Barristan had joined the king to hunt it, along with Prince Joffrey, Sandor Clegane, Balon Swann, and half the court. So Ned must needs sit the Iron Throne in his absence.
“你能确定他们不是土匪毛贼？”坐在王座下方议事桌边的瓦里斯轻声问。他身旁的派席尔大学士坐立难安，小指头则摆弄着一枝笔。列席的重臣只有他们几个。前几天有人在御林里瞧见了一只白公鹿，蓝礼大人和巴利斯坦爵士便陪伴国王前去打猎，同行的还有乔佛里王子、桑铎·克里冈、巴隆·史文以及半数廷臣。正因如此，奈德才不得不暂代劳勃坐在铁王座上处理国事。
At least he could sit. Save the council, the rest must stand respectfully, or kneel. The petitioners clustered near the tall doors, the knights and high lords and ladies beneath the tapestries, the smallfolk in the gallery, the mailed guards in their cloaks, gold or grey: all stood.
好歹他还有椅子可坐。在王座厅里，除了王室家族和几位重臣，余人都得毕恭毕敬地或站或跪。前来请愿的人群聚大门边，骑士、贵族与仕女站在挂毯下，平民百姓则在走廊上。全副武装的卫兵肩披金色或灰色的披风，威严挺立。
The villagers were kneeling: men, women, and children, alike tattered and bloody, their faces drawn by fear. The three knights who had brought them here to bear witness stood behind them.
这群村民单膝下跪，不论男女老少，清一色衣着破烂，满身血污，脸上刻满了恐惧。带他们进来作证的三位骑士站在后面。
“Brigands , Lord Varys?” Ser Raymun Darry’s voice dripped scorn. “Oh, they were brigands, beyond a doubt. Lannister brigands.”
“土匪？瓦里斯大人，”雷蒙·戴瑞爵士语透轻蔑。“哼，说得好，他们当然是土匪了。兰尼斯特家的土匪。”
Ned could feel the unease in the hall, as high lords and servants alike strained to listen. He could not pretend to surprise. The west had been a tinderbox since Catelyn had seized Tyrion Lannister. Both Riverrun and Casterly Rock had called their banners, and armies were massing in the pass below the Golden Tooth. It had only been a matter of time until the blood began to flow. The sole question that remained was how best to stanch the wound.
奈德感觉得到大厅里的紧张气氛，在场人等不论出身高低，均屏息竖耳倾听。这也不是什么新鲜事，自凯特琳逮捕提利昂·兰尼斯特之后，西境便宛如一座柴火库。奔流城与凯岩城均已召集封臣，此刻两军正向金牙城下的山口聚集。爆发流血冲突是迟早的事。现在惟一的问题是如何能将伤害减到最小。
Sad-eyed Ser Karyl Vance, who would have been handsome but for the winestain birthmark that discolored his face, gestured at the kneeling villagers. “This is all the remains of the holdfast of Sherrer, Lord Eddard. The rest are dead, along with the people of Wendish Town and the Mummer’s Ford.”
满眼忧伤，若非脸上酒红色的胎记，本来还算英俊的卡列尔·凡斯爵士指着跪在地上的村民说：“艾德大人，榭尔全村就只剩这些人，其他的都和温德镇、戏子滩的居民一样，通通死光了。”
“Rise,” Ned commanded the villagers. He never trusted what a man told him from his knees. “All of you, up.”
“起来，”奈德命令村民们。他向来不相信一个人跪着的时候所说的话。“你们通通都起来。”
In ones and twos, the holdfast of Sherrer struggled to its feet. One ancient needed to be helped, and a young girl in a bloody dress stayed on her knees, staring blankly at Ser Arys Oakheart, who stood by the foot of the throne in the white armor of the Kingsguard, ready to protect and defend the king … or, Ned supposed, the King’s Hand.
榭尔的居民听了纷纷挣扎着起身。一位老者要靠人搀扶才能站起，另一个穿着血衣的女孩则维持跪姿，怔怔地望着亚历斯·奥克赫特爵士。他身穿御林铁卫的白袍白甲，站在王座下方，随时准备誓死保卫国王……或者，奈德猜测，保卫国王的首相。
“Joss,” Ser Raymun Darry said to a plump balding man in a brewer’s apron. “Tell the Hand what happened at Sherrer.”
“乔斯，”雷蒙·戴瑞爵士对一位穿着酿酒师傅围裙的光头胖子说，“快跟首相大人说榭尔发生了什么事。”
Joss nodded. “If it please His Grace—”
乔斯点点头。“启禀国王陛下——”
“His Grace is hunting across the Blackwater,” Ned said, wondering how a man could live his whole life a few days ride from the Red Keep and still have no notion what his king looked like. Ned was clad in a white linen doublet with the direwolf of Stark on the breast; his black wool cloak was fastened at the collar by his silver hand of office. Black and white and grey, all the shades of truth. “I am Lord Eddard Stark, the King’s Hand. Tell me who you are and what you know of these raiders.”
“国王陛下他正在黑水湾对岸打猎，”奈德一边说，一边自忖一个人有没有可能终生居住在距红堡仅几日骑程的地方，却仍旧对国王的相貌一无所知。奈德穿着白色的亚麻外衣，胸前绣有史塔克家族的冰原狼纹章，黑羊毛披风用象征职位的银手徽章别在颈边。黑白灰三色，正是真理的三种可能。“我是国王之手，即御前首相艾德·史塔克公爵。告诉我你是谁，以及你对这些强盗所知的一切。”
“I keep … I kept … I kept an alehouse, m’lord, in Sherrer, by the stone bridge. The finest ale south of the Neck, everyone said so, begging your pardons, m’lord. It’s gone now like all the rest, m’lord. They come and drank their fill and spilled the rest before they fired my roof, and they would of spilled my blood too, if they’d caught me. M’lord.”
“俺开了……以前俺开了……以前俺开了家酒馆，大人，在榭尔，就在石桥旁边。大家都说俺酿的麦酒是颈泽以南最好的，大人，请您见谅。可是大人，现在全都没了。他们进来喝饱以后又把剩下的倒掉，然后放火烧了房子，本来啊，大人，本来他们还打算要俺命，可他们没逮着。”
“They burnt us out,” a farmer beside him said. “Come riding in the dark, up from the south, and fired the fields and the houses alike, killing them as tried to stop them. They weren’t no raiders, though, m’lord. They had no mind to steal our stock, not these, they butchered my milk cow where she stood and left her for the flies and the crows.”
“他们放火把咱逼走，”他旁边的一个农夫说，“大半夜里从南方来，把田啊房子啊通通给烧了，谁要是敢上前阻拦就没命。可是大人，他们不是强盗，因为他们根本不是来抢东西，他们把我的乳牛宰了之后，把尸体丢在那儿喂苍蝇和乌鸦。”
“They rode down my ’prentice boy,” said a squat man with a smith’s muscles and a bandage around his head. He had put on his finest clothes to come to court, but his breeches were patched, his cloak travel-stained and dusty. “Chased him back and forth across the fields on their horses, poking at him with their lances like it was a game, them laughing and the boy stumbling and screaming till the big one pierced him clean through.”
“他们还把我徒弟活活踩死，”一个有着铁匠的肌肉，头上包了绷带的矮胖男子说。看得出他特别换上最好的衣服上朝，但那条裤子却布满补丁，斗篷也是风尘仆仆。“他们骑在马上哈哈大笑，追着他跑来跑去，还拿枪戳他，当成是在玩游戏。那孩子就这样跑啊，惨叫个不停，最后摔倒在地，被块头最大那家伙一枪刺死。”
The girl on her knees craned her head up at Ned, high above her on the throne. “They killed my mother too, Your Grace. And they … they …” Her voice trailed off, as if she had forgotten what she was about to say. She began to sob.
跪在地上的女孩伸长脖子抬头看着高高在上的奈德。“陛下，他们还杀了我娘。然后他们……他们……”她的话音渐弱，仿佛忘了原本要说些什么，自顾自地啼哭了起来。
Ser Raymun Darry took up the tale. “At Wendish Town, the people sought shelter in their holdfast, but the walls were timbered. The raiders piled straw against the wood and burnt them all alive. When the Wendish folk opened their gates to flee the fire, they shot them down with arrows as they came running out, even women with suckling babes.”
雷蒙·戴瑞爵士接过话茬：“温德镇的居民躲进庄园，可房子乃是木制，入侵者便将其铺上稻草，把他们活活烧死在里面。有些人开门冲出火场逃走，他们便用弓箭射杀，连怀抱奶娃的女人也不放过。”
“Oh, dreadful,” murmured Varys. “How cruel can men be?”
“哎哟，真是可怕，”瓦里斯喃喃道，“怎么会有人如此残忍呢？”
“They would of done the same for us, but the Sherrer holdfast’s made of stone,” Joss said. “Some wanted to smoke us out, but the big one said there was riper fruit up river, and they made for the Mummer’s Ford.”
“他们本来也要这么对付俺们，幸好榭尔的庄园是石头做的，”乔斯道，“有人想用烟把俺们薰出来，可那大块头说河上游比较有收获，就奔戏子滩去了。”
Ned could feel cold steel against his fingers as he leaned forward. Between each finger was a blade, the points of twisted swords fanning out like talons from arms of the throne. Even after three centuries, some were still sharp enough to cut. The Iron Throne was full of traps for the unwary. The songs said it had taken a thousand blades to make it, heated white-hot in the furnace breath of Balerion the Black Dread. The hammering had taken fifty-nine days. The end of it was this hunched black beast made of razor edges and barbs and ribbons of sharp metal; a chair that could kill a man, and had, if the stories could be believed.
奈德身体前倾，手指触碰到冰冷的金属。他每根指头间都是一柄刀刃，尖端是弯曲的利剑，有如爪子般从王座的扶手向外伸展。虽然历经了三个世纪，其中有些刃叶依旧锋利逼人。对粗心大意的人来说，铁王座称得上机关密布。歌谣里唱着当初花了一千把剑，经过黑死神贝勒里恩的烈焰加热熔解，方才铸成王座。敲敲打打前后总共花了五十九天，最后的成品就是如今这座边缘如剃刀般锋利，无处不是倒钩和纠结的驼背黑怪物。这张椅子可以杀人，倘若传说属实，还真的杀过。
What Eddard Stark was doing sitting there he would never comprehend, yet there he sat, and these people looked to him for justice. “What proof do you have that these were Lannisters?” he asked, trying to keep his fury under control. “Did they wear crimson cloaks or fly a lion banner?”
艾德·史塔克并不想坐上来，但如今他高踞于此，而下面的人民前来请求他主持正义。“你们有何证据指明这些是兰尼斯特家族的人？”他问，同时努力压抑怒气。“他们穿了红披风或打着狮子旗吗？”
“Even Lannisters are not so blind stupid as that,” Ser Marq Piper snapped. He was a swaggering bantam rooster of a youth, too young and too hot-blooded for Ned’s taste, though a fast friend of Catelyn’s brother, Edmure Tully.
“即便兰尼斯特的人，也不至于蠢到这种地步。”马柯·派柏爵士斥道。他是个脾气暴躁、有如好斗雄鸡的年轻人。虽然在奈德看来，他历练太浅，又太过血气方刚，但他却是凯特琳的弟弟艾德慕·徒利的好友。
“Every man among them was mounted and mailed, my lord,” Ser Karyl answered calmly. “They were armed with steel-tipped lances and longswords, with battle-axes for the butchering.” He gestured toward one of the ragged survivors. “You. Yes, you, no one’s going to hurt you. Tell the Hand what you told me.”
“大人，他们个个骑着骏马身披铠甲，”卡列尔爵士冷静地回答，“手中持有精钢长枪和宝剑，还有用来屠杀村民的战斧。”他伸手指指这群衣衫褴褛的幸存者中的一人。“你，对，就是你，说出来没关系，把你跟我说的话都告诉首相大人。”
The old man bobbed his head. “Concerning their horses,” he said, “it were warhorses they rode. Many a year I worked in old Ser Willum’s stables, so I knows the difference. Not a one of these ever pulled a plow, gods bear witness if I’m wrong.”
老人低下头。“关于他们骑的马，”他说，“他们骑的是战马。我在维伦老爵士的马房里做过很多年，看得出其中差异。他们骑的马没有一匹是犁过田的，我敢以天上诸神之名发誓。”
“Well-mounted brigands,” observed Littlefinger. “Perhaps they stole the horses from the last place they raided.”
“骑好马的土匪，”小指头表示意见，“或许马是他们刚从别处抢来的。”
“How many men were there in this raiding party?” Ned asked.
“这群强盗一共有多少人？”奈德问。
“A hundred, at the least,” Joss answered, in the same instant as the bandaged smith said, “Fifty,” and the grandmother behind him, “Hunnerds and hunnerds, m’lord, an army they was.”
“最起码一百个。”乔斯回答，而在同时，那位包着绷带的铁匠也开了口，“五十个。”他后面的老太婆则说，“好几百人啊，大人，根本就是一支军队。”
“You are more right than you know, goodwoman,” Lord Eddard told her. “You say they flew no banners. What of the armor they wore? Did any of you note ornaments or decorations, devices on shield or helm?”
“好太太，我相信您说得很正确。”艾德公爵告诉她，“你们说他们没打旗帜，那他们穿的盔甲呢？你们有没有谁注意到上面的花纹或装饰，或者是盾牌和头盔上的家徽？”
The brewer, Joss, shook his head. “It grieves me, m’lord, but no, the armor they showed us was plain, only … the one who led them, he was armored like the rest, but there was no mistaking him all the same. It was the size of him, m’lord. Those as say the giants are all dead never saw this one, I swear. Big as an ox he was, and a voice like stone breaking.”
酿酒师傅乔斯摇摇头。“大人，有的话那敢情好，可他们穿的盔甲样式都很普通，只有……只有那领头的，他虽然穿得和其他人一样，可您绝不会把他和别人弄混。大人，这家伙块头可真大，俺敢打赌，那些断言巨人已死的人没见过这家伙。他块头大得跟头牛似的，讲起话来声音响得像山石迸裂。”
“The Mountain!” Ser Marq said loudly. “Can any man doubt it? This was Gregor Clegane’s work.”
“一定是‘魔山’！”马柯爵士大声说，“这还用问？一定是格雷果·克里冈干的好事。”
Ned heard muttering from beneath the windows and the far end of the hall. Even in the galley, nervous whispers were exchanged. High lords and smallfolk alike knew what it could mean if Ser Marq was proved right. Ser Gregor Clegane stood bannerman to Lord Tywin Lannister.
奈德听见窗户下方和大厅远端窃窃私语声此起彼落，不安的说话声也从外面的走廊传来。在场众人不论贫富贵贱，都清楚倘若马柯爵士所言得到证实，代表着什么：格雷果·克里冈爵士正是泰温·兰尼斯特公爵的封臣。
He studied the frightened faces of the villagers. Small wonder they had been so fearful; they had thought they were being dragged here to name Lord Tywin a red-handed butcher before a king who was his son by marriage. He wondered if the knights had given them a choice.
他审视着村民惊恐的脸孔，也难怪他们如此害怕，他们起初必定以为自己被拖来这里，要在国王面前指控泰温大人为满手血腥的屠夫——而国王本人正是泰温的女婿。他很怀疑那几位骑士有没有给他们选择的余地。
Grand Maester Pycelle rose ponderously from the council table, his chain of office clinking. “Ser Marq, with respect, you cannot know that this outlaw was Ser Gregor. There are many large men in the realm.”
派席尔大学士从议事桌边沉重地站起身，象征职位的项链不住碰撞。“马柯爵士，没有对您不敬的意思，但我们无法就此认定那强盗便是格雷果爵士。国内的大块头大有人在。”
“As large as the Mountain That Rides?” Ser Karyl said. “I have never met one.”
“但有人跟魔山一样吗？”卡列尔爵士道，“我可从没见过。”
“Nor has any man here,” Ser Raymun added hotly. “Even his brother is a pup beside him. My lords, open your eyes. Do you need to see his seal on the corpses? It was Gregor.”
“相信在场也没人见过。”雷蒙爵士愤怒地说，“跟他站在一起，连他弟弟都像只小狗。在座诸君，请睁开您们的眼睛吧，难道你们还需要亲眼见到他的印章盖上尸体才肯相信吗？这一定是格雷果，不会错的。”
“Why should Ser Gregor turn brigand?” Pycelle asked. “By the grace of his liege lord, he holds a stout keep and lands of his own. The man is an anointed knight.”
“然则格雷果爵士何必去打家劫舍？”派席尔问，“靠着他的封君老爷，他不但坐拥坚固堡垒，还有自己的良田领地，此人可是个涂抹圣油，经过正式册封的骑士啊。”
“A false knight!” Ser Marq said. “Lord Tywin’s mad dog.”
“这家伙是个虚伪的骑士！”马柯爵士道，“他是泰温大人的疯狗。”
“My lord Hand,” Pycelle declared in a stiff voice, “I urge you to remind this good knight that Lord Tywin Lannister is the father of our own gracious queen.”
“首相大人，”派席尔语气僵硬地说，“还请您提醒这位‘正直’的骑士先生，泰温·兰尼斯特大人是我们王后陛下的父亲。”
“Thank you, Grand Maester Pycelle,” Ned said. “I fear we might have forgotten that if you had not pointed it out.”
“谢谢您，派席尔大学士，”奈德道，“您若不提起，只怕我们都忘了。”
From his vantage point atop the throne, he could see men slipping out the door at the far end of the hall. Hares going to ground, he supposed … or rats off to nibble the queen’s cheese. He caught a glimpse of Septa Mordane in the gallery, with his daughter Sansa beside her. Ned felt a flash of anger; this was no place for a girl. But the septa could not have known that today’s court would be anything but the usual tedious business of hearing petitions, settling disputes between rival holdfasts, and adjudicating the placement of boundary stones.
从高高的王座上，他看到大厅尽头有人溜出去。兔子就这么跑走了，他心想……不，应该说是贪恋王后奶酪的耗子吧。他瞥见茉丹修女带着珊莎站在走廊上，顿时火冒三丈：这不是小女孩该来的地方。但修女事先也不可能料想到今天的会议内容并非繁冗的日常杂务——聆听百姓请愿，调解村镇间纷争，以及判定土地界石划分等等。
At the council table below, Petyr Baelish lost interest in his quill and leaned forward. “Ser Marq, Ser Karyl, Ser Raymun—perhaps I might ask you a question? These holdfasts were under your protection. Where were you when all this slaughtering and burning was going on?”
下方的议事桌边，培提尔·贝里席终于玩腻了他的羽毛笔，倾身向前道：“马柯爵士，卡列尔爵士，雷蒙爵士——可否容我问个问题？这几个村子都是由你们所管辖与保护，请问屠杀发生当时诸位又在何地呢？”
Ser Karyl Vance answered. “I was attending my lord father in the pass below the Golden Tooth, as was Ser Marq. When the word of these outrages reached Ser Edmure Tully, he sent word that we should take a small force of men to find what survivors we could and bring them to the king.”
卡列尔·凡斯爵士回答：“当时我与家父都在金牙城下的山口，马柯爵士也是。当这些暴行传到艾德慕·徒利耳中时，他嘱咐我们率领小队人马，前来搜索幸存者，然后带他们觐见国王。”
Ser Raymun Darry spoke up. “Ser Edmure had summoned me to Riverrun with all my strength. I was camped across the river from his walls, awaiting his commands, when the word reached me. By the time I could return to my own lands, Clegane and his vermin were back across the Red Fork, riding for Lannister’s hills.”
雷蒙·戴瑞爵士发言道：“艾德慕爵士早已让我率领我的兵力赶到奔流城。我接获消息时，正在城外隔河扎营，等候进一步命令。等我赶回封地，克里冈和他的走狗已经渡过红叉河，回兰尼斯特家的丘陵地去了。”
Littlefinger stroked the point of his beard thoughtfully. “And if they come again, ser?”
小指头若有所思地抚弄他的尖胡子。“爵士先生，倘若他们再度来袭呢？”
“If they come again, we’ll use their blood to water the fields they burnt,” Ser Marq Piper declared hotly.
“他们要是有胆再来，我们就用他们的血，浇灌被他们烧掉的田地。”马柯·派柏爵士愤怒地说。
“Ser Edmure has sent men to every village and holdfast within a day’s ride of the border,” Ser Karyl explained. “The next raider will not have such an easy time of it.”
“艾德慕爵士已派兵驻防距离边境一日骑程内所有村镇与庄园。”卡列尔爵士解释，“若还有人来犯，可不会像这次那么好过了。”
And that may be precisely what Lord Tywin wants , Ned thought to himself, to bleed off strength from Riverrun, goad the boy into scattering his swords . His wife’s brother was young, and more gallant than wise. He would try to hold every inch of his soil, to defend every man, woman, and child who named him lord, and Tywin Lannister was shrewd enough to know that.
这很可能正是泰温公爵的目的，奈德心里明白，借此压榨奔流城的力量，诱使那小伙子分散兵力。他小舅子年纪尚轻，英勇有余，睿智却不足。他会竭尽全力守住每一寸土地，保护每一个依附他名下的男女老少。精明老练如泰温·兰尼斯特，自当很清楚这点。
“If your fields and holdfasts are safe from harm,” Lord Petyr was saying, “what then do you ask of the throne?”
“既然你们的田产和房舍都安全了，”培提尔伯爵道，“那还上朝来做什么？”
“The lords of the Trident keep the king’s peace,” Ser Raymun Darry said. “The Lannisters have broken it. We ask leave to answer them, steel for steel. We ask justice for the smallfolk of Sherrer and Wendish Town and the Mummer’s Ford.”
“三河流域的领主以国王之名维持境内和平，”雷蒙·戴瑞说，“兰尼斯特的人破坏了和平。我们要求血债血偿，我们要为榭尔村、温德镇和戏子滩的百姓讨个公道。”
“Edmure agrees, we must pay Gregor Clegane back his bloody coin,” Ser Marq declared, “but old Lord Hoster commanded us to come here and beg the king’s leave before we strike.”
“艾德慕同意我们以牙还牙，用相同的手段对付格雷果·克里冈，”马柯爵士宣布，“但霍斯特老爵爷命令我们首先得到国王的允许再出击。”
Thank the gods for old Lord Hoster, then . Tywin Lannister was as much fox as lion. If indeed he’d sent Ser Gregor to burn and pillage—and Ned did not doubt that he had—he’d taken care to see that he rode under cover of night, without banners, in the guise of a common brigand. Should Riverrun strike back, Cersei and her father would insist that it had been the Tullys who broke the king’s peace, not the Lannisters. The gods only knew what Robert would believe.
感谢天上诸神，还好有霍斯特大人在。与其说泰温·兰尼斯特是头狮子，不如说他是只狐狸。假如当真是他派格雷果爵士去杀人放火——奈德对此毫无疑问——他一定会特意嘱咐格雷果小心翼翼，夜晚行动，不张旗帜，扮成普通强盗。倘若奔流城反击，瑟曦和她父亲便能坚称破坏和平的是徒利家族，而非兰尼斯特。到时候劳勃会相信哪一边，只有诸神才知道。
Grand Maester Pycelle was on his feet again. “My lord Hand, if these good folk believe that Ser Gregor has forsaken his holy vows for plunder and rape, let them go to his liege lord and make their complaint. These crimes are no concern of the throne. Let them seek Lord Tywin’s justice.”
派席尔大学士又站起来。“首相大人。如果这几位好村民坚信格雷果爵士背弃了他神圣的誓言，转而奸淫掳掠，请让他们去见他的封君大人，向他去抱怨。这些罪行与王室无关，他们应当请求泰温大人主持正义。”
“It is all the king’s justice,” Ned told him. “North, south, east, or west, all we do we do in Robert’s name.”
“这些当然与国王有关，”奈德告诉他，“不论东西南北，我们均以劳勃之名行事。”
“The king’s justice,” Grand Maester Pycelle said. “So it is, and so we should defer this matter until the king—”
“和国王有关，”派席尔大学士说，“此话有理，那么我们该等国王回来再行商——”
“The king is hunting across the river and may not return for days,” Lord Eddard said. “Robert bid me to sit here in his place, to listen with his ears, and to speak with his voice. I mean to do just that … though I agree that he must be told.” He saw a familiar face beneath the tapestries. “Ser Robar.”
“国王此刻正在河对岸打猎，可能好几天都不会回来。”艾德公爵说，“劳勃要我暂代他处理国事，用他的耳朵倾听，用他的声音说话，而我将谨遵其意……但我同意应该要知会他。”他在壁毡下看到一张熟悉的脸孔。“罗拔爵士。”
Ser Robar Royce stepped forward and bowed. “My lord.”
罗拔·罗伊斯爵士前跨一步，鞠躬道：“大人，您有何吩咐？”
“Your father is hunting with the king,” Ned said. “Will you bring them word of what was said and done here today?”
“令尊与国王陛下一道外出狩猎，”奈德说，“可否请你将今日之事通报他们？”
“At once, my lord.”
“大人，我这就去办。”
“Do we have your leave to take our vengeance against Ser Gregor, then?” Marq Piper asked the throne.
“那我们是不是这就可找格雷果爵士报一箭之仇？”马柯·派柏询问摄政。
“Vengeance?” Ned said. “I thought we were speaking of justice. Burning Clegane’s fields and slaughtering his people will not restore the king’s peace, only your injured pride.” He glanced away before the young knight could voice his outraged protest, and addressed the villagers. “People of Sherrer, I cannot give you back your homes or your crops, nor can I restore your dead to life. But perhaps I can give you some small measure of justice, in the name of our king, Robert.”
“报仇？”奈德说，“我以为我们谈的是主持正义。到克里冈的封地放火杀人并不会恢复王国境内的和平，只能稍稍弥补你受损的自尊。”愤怒的年轻骑士还来不及反驳，他便转开视线，对那群村民说，“榭尔的居民们，我无法归还你们的家园和你们的作物，更不能将死者复生。但或许我能以我们的国王劳勃之名，还你们一个迟来的公道。”
Every eye in the hall was fixed on him, waiting. Slowly Ned struggled to his feet, pushing himself up from the throne with the strength of his arms, his shattered leg screaming inside its cast. He did his best to ignore the pain; it was no moment to let them see his weakness. “The First Men believed that the judge who called for death should wield the sword, and in the north we hold to that still. I mislike sending another to do my killing … yet it seems I have no choice.” He gestured at his broken leg.
大厅里的每一只眼睛都注视着他，凝神等待。奈德缓缓地挣扎着站起来，两手全力撑住王座，断腿撕心裂肺地剧痛。他尽一切所能不去注意疼痛，此刻千万不能在他们面前显示虚弱。“先民认为判人死刑者应该亲自操刀，我们在北境依旧保留了这个传统。我本不愿由他人代为执行……但看来我别无选择。”他指指自己的断腿。
“Lord Eddard!” The shout came from the west side of the hall as a handsome stripling of a boy strode forth boldly. Out of his armor, Ser Loras Tyrell looked even younger than his sixteen years. He wore pale blue silk, his belt a linked chain of golden roses, the sigil of his House. “I beg you the honor of acting in your place. Give this task to me, my lord, and I swear I shall not fail you.”
“艾德大人！”从大厅西侧传来一声喊叫，一名俊美的年轻男孩勇敢地向前走来。年仅十六的洛拉斯·提利尔爵士，脱去铠甲后愈发显得年轻。他身穿浅蓝色丝衣，系着朵朵金玫瑰连缀而成的腰带。金玫瑰是他家族的纹章。“我恳求您让我有幸代您出战。把这个任务交给我吧，大人，我发誓不会教您失望。”
Littlefinger chuckled. “Ser Loras, if we send you off alone, Ser Gregor will send us back your head with a plum stuffed in that pretty mouth of yours. The Mountain is not the sort to bend his neck to any man’s justice.”
小指头轻笑。“洛拉斯爵士，如果我们单只派您去对付格雷果爵士，他八成会把您的头送回来，顺便塞颗李子在您那张漂亮的嘴里。魔山可不会乖乖地看在正义的份上束手就擒。”
“I do not fear Gregor Clegane,” Ser Loras said haughtily.
“我不怕格雷果·克里冈。”洛拉斯爵士骄傲地说。
Ned eased himself slowly back onto the hard iron seat of Aegon’s misshapen throne. His eyes searched the faces along the wall. “Lord Beric,” he called out. “Thoros of Myr. Ser Gladden. Lord Lothar.” The men named stepped forward one by one. “Each of you is to assemble twenty men, to bring my word to Gregor’s keep. Twenty of my own guards shall go with you. Lord Beric Dondarrion, you shall have the command, as befits your rank.”
奈德缓缓坐回伊耿那张畸形王座的冷硬铁板上，他的视线沿着墙壁一张接一张脸孔地搜索。“贝里大人，”他喊，“密尔的索罗斯，葛拉登爵士，罗沙大人。”被点到名字的人纷纷站到前面。“请你们各带二十名士兵，将我的命令送到格雷果的城堡。我将派出自己的二十名侍卫与你们同行。贝里·唐德利恩大人，此次任务由您指挥，因为您的爵禄最高。”
The young lord with the red-gold hair bowed. “As you command, Lord Eddard.”
金红头发的年轻伯爵鞠躬道：“艾德大人，悉听尊命。”
Ned raised his voice, so it carried to the far end of the throne room. “In the name of Robert of the House Baratheon, the First of his Name, King of the Andals and the Rhoynar and the First Men, Lord of the Seven Kingdoms and Protector of the Realm, by the word of Eddard of the House Stark, his Hand, I charge you to ride to the westlands with all haste, to cross the Red Fork of the Trident under the king’s flag, and there bring the king’s justice to the false knight Gregor Clegane, and to all those who shared in his crimes. I denounce him, and attaint him, and strip him of all rank and titles, of all lands and incomes and holdings, and do sentence him to death. May the gods take pity on his soul.”
奈德提高音量，让王座大厅里所有的人都能听见。“以安达尔人、洛伊拿人和先民的国王，七国的统治者暨全境守护者，拜拉席恩家族的劳勃一世之名，我，史塔克家族的艾德公爵，身为其国王之手，在此命令你们即刻高举国王的旗帜，全速渡过三叉戟河的红叉支流，进入西境，依照国王律法，制裁虚伪的骑士格雷果·克里冈，以及所有与他合谋的共犯。我在此宣告，从今以后，褫夺其一切官阶与职衔，收回其一切封地、赋税和房产，并明令处之以死刑。愿天上诸神怜悯他的灵魂。”
When the echo of his words had died away, the Knight of Flowers seemed perplexed. “Lord Eddard, what of me?”
余音渐落之后，百花骑士神情困惑地问：“艾德大人，那我该做什么？”
Ned looked down on him. From on high, Loras Tyrell seemed almost as young as Robb. “No one doubts your valor, Ser Loras, but we are about justice here, and what you seek is vengeance.” He looked back to Lord Beric. “Ride at first light. These things are best done quickly.” He held up a hand. “The throne will hear no more petitions today.”
奈德低头看着他。居高临下，洛拉斯·提利尔看起来就和罗柏一样年轻。“洛拉斯爵士，没有人怀疑您的勇武，然而我们今天谈的是律法和正义，你要的却是报仇雪恨。”他转向贝里伯爵说，“明天天亮就出发，这事最好尽快处理。”语毕他举起手。“今天的请愿到此为止。”
Alyn and Porther climbed the steep iron steps to help him back down. As they made their descent, he could feel Loras Tyrell’s sullen stare, but the boy had stalked away before Ned reached the floor of the throne room.
埃林和波瑟爬上陡峻狭窄的铁台阶，搀扶他下去。步下阶梯时，奈德感觉得出洛拉斯·提利尔愠怒的瞪视，然而等他回到地面，那男孩已经走了。
At the base of the Iron Throne, Varys was gathering papers from the council table. Littlefinger and Grand Maester Pycelle had already taken their leave. “You are a bolder man than I, my lord,” the eunuch said softly.
铁王座下方，瓦里斯正忙着收拾议事桌上散乱的文件。小指头和派席尔国师已先行离去。“大人，您的胆子可比我大多了。”太监轻声说。
“How so, Lord Varys?” Ned asked brusquely. His leg was throbbing, and he was in no mood for word games.
“瓦里斯大人，此话怎讲？”奈德唐突地问。他的断腿隐隐抽痛，此刻他没有心情玩文字游戏。
“Had it been me up there, I should have sent Ser Loras. He so wanted to go … and a man who has the Lannisters for his enemies would do well to make the Tyrells his friends.”
“换做是我坐上面，我大概会派洛拉斯爵士去。瞧他那副跃跃欲试的模样……再说要与兰尼斯特为敌，还有什么能比拉拢提利尔家族更要紧呢？”
“Ser Loras is young,” said Ned. “I daresay he will outgrow the disappointment.”
“洛拉斯爵士还年轻，”奈德道，“我敢说他很快就会忘记这次失意。”
“And Ser Ilyn?” The eunuch stroked a plump, powdered cheek. “He is the King’s Justice, after all. Sending other men to do his office … some might construe that as a grave insult.”
“那伊林爵士呢？”太监轻抚他搽过粉的肥胖脸颊。“再怎么说，他到底是国王的执法官哪，叫别人去做他份内之事……可能会被解读成恶意侮辱哟。”
“No slight was intended.” In truth, Ned did not trust the mute knight, though perhaps that was only because he misliked executioners. “I remind you, the Paynes are bannermen to House Lannister. I thought it best to choose men who owed Lord Tywin no fealty.”
“我并无冒犯之意。”老实说，奈德并不信任那位哑巴骑士，但归根到底，或许只是肇因于他对刽子手的嫌恶罢。“容我提醒您，派恩家族世代是兰尼斯特臣属。我认为选择并未对泰温大人宣誓效忠的人前去比较妥当。”
“Very prudent, no doubt,” Varys said. “Still, I chanced to see Ser Ilyn in the back of the hall, staring at us with those pale eyes of his, and I must say, he did not look pleased, though to be sure it is hard to tell with our silent knight. I hope he outgrows his disappointment as well. He does so love his work …”
“您的作法毫无疑问非常谨慎，”瓦里斯道，“只是我碰巧看见伊林爵士站在大厅后面，张大那双苍白的眼睛瞪着我们，我必须承认，他看起来委实不怎么高兴，虽然我们这位沉默寡言的骑士先生心里究竟在想些什么，原本就不易猜测。我也希望他很快就会忘记这次失意。他可是热爱着他的工作啊……”
*SANSA
第四十五章 珊莎
“H e wouldn’t send Ser Loras,” Sansa told Jeyne Poole that night as they shared a cold supper by lamplight. “I think it was because of his leg.”
“他竟然不肯派洛拉斯爵士去，”当晚她们一同就着油灯、吃冰冷的晚餐时，珊莎把这件事告诉珍妮·普尔。“我觉得一定是他脚受伤的关系。”
Lord Eddard had taken his supper in his bedchamber with Alyn, Harwin, and Vayon Poole, the better to rest his broken leg, and Septa Mordane had complained of sore feet after standing in the gallery all day. Arya was supposed to join them, but she was late coming back from her dancing lesson.
为了休养腿伤，艾德大人在他的卧房里与埃林、哈尔温和维扬·普尔共进晚餐，而茉丹修女在走廊上站了整天，抱怨起两脚酸痛，没有出来用饭。本来艾莉亚该跟她们一起吃，但她上舞蹈课还没回来。
“His leg?” Jeyne said uncertainly. She was a pretty, dark-haired girl of Sansa’s own age. “Did Ser Loras hurt his leg?”
“他脚受伤？”珍妮不确定地说。她和珊莎同龄，是个可爱的黑发女孩。“洛拉斯爵士脚受伤了？”
“Not his leg,” Sansa said, nibbling delicately at a chicken leg. “Father’s leg, silly. It hurts him ever so much, it makes him cross. Otherwise I’m certain he would have sent Ser Loras.”
“不是他的腿，”珊莎边说边优雅地咬着鸡腿。“傻瓜，是我父亲的腿。你看他痛得那么厉害，连脾气也暴躁起来了。不然我想他一定会派洛拉斯爵士去的。”
Her father’s decision still bewildered her. When the Knight of Flowers had spoken up, she’d been sure she was about to see one of Old Nan’s stories come to life. Ser Gregor was the monster and Ser Loras the true hero who would slay him. He even looked a true hero, so slim and beautiful, with golden roses around his slender waist and his rich brown hair tumbling down into his eyes. And then Father had refused him! It had upset her more than she could tell. She had said as much to Septa Mordane as they descended the stairs from the gallery, but the septa had only told her it was not her place to question her lord father’s decisions.
父亲的决定令她颇感困惑。百花骑士发言的时候，她本以为自己就要亲眼见到老奶妈的故事成真。格雷果爵士是怪兽，而洛拉斯爵士则是真正的英雄，定会将之斩杀。他那么纤瘦美丽，黄金玫瑰围绕着纤细腰身，浓密的棕发坠进双眼，活脱脱就是真英雄的模样。结果父亲竟一口回绝了他！她气得说不出话来。事后她和茉丹修女从长廊走下楼梯时，她忍不住说出自己的想法，但修女却说她不该过问父亲的决定。
That was when Lord Baelish had said, “Oh, I don’t know, Septa. Some of her lord father’s decisions could do with a bit of questioning. The young lady is as wise as she is lovely.” He made a sweeping bow to Sansa, so deep she was not quite sure if she was being complimented or mocked.
这时一旁的贝里席伯爵接口道：“哎，修女，我也弄不明白，只觉得她父亲大人有些决策可以再深思熟虑一些。我看您家小姐的睿智不输她的美貌。”说完他向珊莎深深鞠躬，弯腰的程度反而让珊莎怀疑他究竟是在恭维还是讥讽。
Septa Mordane had been very upset to realize that Lord Baelish had overheard them. “The girl was just talking, my lord,” she’d said. “Foolish chatter. She meant nothing by the comment.”
茉丹修女发现她们的谈话内容被贝里席大人听见，非常不悦。“大人，这孩子只是随便说说，”她说，“不过是瞎说话，没什么特别意思。”
Lord Baelish stroked his little pointed beard and said, “Nothing? Tell me, child, why would you have sent Ser Loras?”
贝里席大人捻捻尖胡子，“没有？孩子，告诉我，为什么你觉得应该派洛拉斯爵士去呢？”
Sansa had no choice but to explain about heroes and monsters. The king’s councillor smiled. “Well, those are not the reasons I’d have given, but …” He had touched her cheek, his thumb lightly tracing the line of a cheekbone. “Life is not a song, sweetling. You may learn that one day to your sorrow.”
珊莎别无选择，只好把英雄和怪兽那套和盘托出。国王的重臣微笑道：“呵，这可不是我的理由，不过……”他碰了碰她脸颊，手指轻轻划过颧骨轮廓。“小可爱，人生不比歌谣。有朝一日，你可能会大失所望。”
Sansa did not feel like telling all that to Jeyne, however; it made her uneasy just to think back on it.
珊莎觉得没必要把这席话也告诉珍妮，光想想就够让她不安了。
“Ser Ilyn’s the King’s Justice, not Ser Loras,” Jeyne said. “Lord Eddard should have sent him.”
“国王的执法官是伊林爵士，不是洛拉斯爵士，”珍妮说，“艾德大人应该派他去才对。”
Sansa shuddered. Every time she looked at Ser Ilyn Payne, she shivered. He made her feel as though something dead were slithering over her naked skin. “Ser Ilyn’s almost like a second monster. I’m glad Father didn’t pick him.”
珊莎听了不禁发起抖来。每次她见到伊林·派恩爵士，总是无法克制地颤抖，仿佛有什么死掉的东西在贴着皮肤滑动。“伊林爵士也跟怪兽没两样。我很高兴父亲没选他去。”
“Lord Beric is as much a hero as Ser Loras. He’s ever so brave and gallant.”
“要论谁是真英雄，贝里大人也不输洛拉斯爵士啊，你瞧他那英勇高贵的模样。”
“I suppose,” Sansa said doubtfully. Beric Dondarrion was handsome enough, but he was awfully old , almost twenty-two; the Knight of Flowers would have been much better. Of course, Jeyne had been in love with Lord Beric ever since she had first glimpsed him in the lists. Sansa thought she was being silly; Jeyne was only a steward’s daughter, after all, and no matter how much she mooned after him, Lord Beric would never look at someone so far beneath him, even if she hadn’t been half his age.
“也是啦。”珊莎有些怀疑地说。贝里·唐德利恩是挺英俊，但他实在有点“老”，都快满二十二岁的人了。还是百花骑士比较合适。话说回来，当初在竞技场上珍妮对贝里伯爵可是一见钟情。珊莎觉得珍妮真蠢，她不过是个管家的女儿，不管多么痴心妄想，贝里大人也绝不可能青睐地位比他低这么多的对象，更何况她的岁数只有他的一半。
It would have been unkind to say so, however, so Sansa took a sip of milk and changed the subject. “I had a dream that Joffrey would be the one to take the white hart,” she said. It had been more of a wish, actually, but it sounded better to call it a dream. Everyone knew that dreams were prophetic. White harts were supposed to be very rare and magical, and in her heart she knew her gallant prince was worthier than his drunken father.
然而这话说出口太伤人，因此珊莎啜了口牛奶，岔开话题。“我梦见乔佛里会得到那头白鹿喔。”她说。事实上这不过是个小小的希望，但说成梦听起来比较好。大家都知道梦是预言和先兆。传说白鹿非常稀少，具有魔力，她心里非常清楚她那英勇的王子比他的酒鬼老爸更有资格得到它。
“A dream? Truly? Did Prince Joffrey just go up to it and touch it with his bare hand and do it no harm?”
“你梦见了？真的吗？乔佛里王子是不是就走上前去，伸手摸摸它，不让它受任何伤害呢？”
“No,” Sansa said. “He shot it with a golden arrow and brought it back for me.” In the songs, the knights never killed magical beasts, they just went up to them and touched them and did them no harm, but she knew Joffrey liked hunting, especially the killing part. Only animals, though. Sansa was certain her prince had no part in murdering Jory and those other poor men; that had been his wicked uncle, the Kingslayer. She knew her father was still angry about that, but it wasn’t fair to blame Joff. That would be like blaming her for something that Arya had done.
“才不是，”珊莎道，“他用一支黄金箭把它射死，然后把它带回来给我。”歌谣里的骑士从不会杀害魔法动物，他们都是走上前去伸手抚摸它们，绝不加以伤害，但她知道乔佛里喜欢打猎，尤其是杀戮的部分。不过他只喜欢杀动物。珊莎很确定她的王子与杀害乔里和其他可怜人无关，那都是他的坏舅舅弑君者干的。她知道父亲依旧为此事生气，但他不该为此责怪小乔，否则就好像艾莉亚闯了祸，却来怪她一样。
“I saw your sister this afternoon,” Jeyne blurted out, as if she’d been reading Sansa’s thoughts. “She was walking through the stables on her hands. Why would she do a thing like that?”
“我今天下午看到你妹妹了，”珍妮脱口而出，仿佛能看穿珊莎的思绪。“瞧她两手倒立在马厩里走来走去的样子。她干嘛那样啊？”
“I’m sure I don’t know why Arya does anything.” Sansa hated stables, smelly places full of manure and flies. Even when she went riding, she liked the boy to saddle the horse and bring it to her in the yard. “Do you want to hear about the court or not?”
“我完全搞不懂艾莉亚做事的动机。”珊莎最讨厌像马厩那样充斥肥料和苍蝇恶臭的地方。就连外出骑马，她通常也是先叫马僮给马上好鞍，再牵到庭院里给她。“你到底想不想听宫里的事嘛？”
“I do,” Jeyne said.
“想。”珍妮说。
“There was a black brother,” Sansa said, “begging men for the Wall, only he was kind of old and smelly.” She hadn’t liked that at all. She had always imagined the Night’s Watch to be men like Uncle Benjen. In the songs, they were called the black knights of the Wall. But this man had been crookbacked and hideous, and he looked as though he might have lice. If this was what the Night’s Watch was truly like, she felt sorry for her bastard half brother, Jon. “Father asked if there were any knights in the hall who would do honor to their houses by taking the black, but no one came forward, so he gave this Yoren his pick of the king’s dungeons and sent him on his way. And later these two brothers came before him, freeriders from the Dornish Marches, and pledged their swords to the service of the king. Father accepted their oaths …”
“今天有个黑衣弟兄，”珊莎说，“来拜托多送点人手去守长城，可他又老又臭。”她一点也不喜欢那个人的模样。她以前总把守夜人都想像成班扬叔叔那样。在歌谣里，大家可称他们为长城上的黑骑士呢。然而今天这人驼着个背，面目可憎，活像生了一身虱子似的。假如守夜人都是这副德行，那她还真为她的同父异母私生子哥哥琼恩感到遗憾。“父亲询问在场的骑士，有没有人愿意披挂黑衣，借此光耀门楣，结果无人响应，最后他让这个叫尤伦的家伙自己去国王的地牢里挑选想要的人，遣他走了。随后来了两个自由骑手，他们是一对来自多恩边疆的兄弟，想要宣誓投效国王。父亲接受了他们的誓约……”
Jeyne yawned. “Are there any lemon cakes?”
珍妮打个哈欠。“还有柠檬蛋糕吗？”
Sansa did not like being interrupted, but she had to admit, lemon cakes sounded more interesting than most of what had gone on in the throne room. “Let’s see,” she said.
珊莎不喜欢被人打断，但她承认跟王座厅里处理的大部分事务比起来，柠檬蛋糕要有意思多了。“我们去看看罢。”
The kitchen yielded no lemon cakes, but they did find half of a cold strawberry pie, and that was almost as good. They ate it on the tower steps, giggling and gossiping and sharing secrets, and Sansa went to bed that night feeling almost as wicked as Arya.
厨房里没有柠檬蛋糕，不过她们找到了半块凉掉的草莓派，也还可以接受。她们在高塔的楼梯间把派吃得一干二净，一边咯咯笑着交换闲话传闻和秘密心事。当晚珊莎上床的时候，觉得自己调皮得简直和艾莉亚一样。
The next morning she woke before first light and crept sleepily to her window to watch Lord Beric form up his men. They rode out as dawn was breaking over the city, with three banners going before them; the crowned stag of the king flew from the high staff, the direwolf of Stark and Lord Beric’s own forked lightning standard from shorter poles. It was all so exciting, a song come to life; the clatter of swords, the flicker of torchlight, banners dancing in the wind, horses snorting and whinnying, the golden glow of sunrise slanting through the bars of the portcullis as it jerked upward. The Winterfell men looked especially fine in their silvery mail and long grey cloaks.
翌日清晨，天还没亮她就起来，睡眼惺忪地爬到窗边观望贝里伯爵整队出发。晓色才刚笼罩城市，他们便已动身。整齐划一的队伍前方打着三面旗帜，王室的宝冠雄鹿飘扬在最高的旗杖顶端，史塔克家族的冰原奔狼和贝里伯爵的分岔闪电则悬挂在比较短的杆子上。刀剑碰撞，火炬摇曳，旗帜飘舞风中；战马嘶鸣，闸门拉起，旭日金光自闸门铁条斜射而进。一切都如此鲜烈、令人兴奋，宛如歌谣中的梦境成真。穿着银色战甲和灰色长披风的临冬城侍卫，看起来尤其英姿勃发。
Alyn carried the Stark banner. When she saw him rein in beside Lord Beric to exchange words, it made Sansa feel ever so proud. Alyn was handsomer than Jory had been; he was going to be a knight one day.
埃林高举着史塔克家族的旗帜。当她看见他在贝里伯爵身边勒住马缰，与之交谈的时候，珊莎觉得好骄傲。埃林比乔里英俊多了，有朝一日他必会当上骑士。
The Tower of the Hand seemed so empty after they left that Sansa was even pleased to see Arya when she went down to break her fast. “Where is everyone?” her sister wanted to know as she ripped the skin from a blood orange. “Did Father send them to hunt down Jaime Lannister?”
少了他们，首相塔显得空荡荡的，因此珊莎下楼吃早餐时，看到艾莉亚也觉得很高兴。“大家都上哪儿去了？”妹妹一边剥开血橙的皮，一边问，“父亲派他们去追捕詹姆·兰尼斯特了吗？”
Sansa sighed. “They rode with Lord Beric, to behead Ser Gregor Clegane.” She turned to Septa Mordane, who was eating porridge with a wooden spoon. “Septa, will Lord Beric spike Ser Gregor’s head on his own gate or bring it back here for the king?” She and Jeyne Poole had been arguing over that last night.
珊莎叹了口气。“他们是跟贝里大人一同去砍格雷果·克里冈爵士项上人头的，”她转头望着正用木匙舀燕麦粥吃的茉丹修女。“修女，贝里大人会把格雷果爵士的头挂在他家城门上，还是带回来给国王呢？”昨晚她和珍妮·普尔为此争论了半天。
The septa was horror-struck. “A lady does not discuss such things over her porridge. Where are your courtesies, Sansa? I swear, of late you’ve been near as bad as your sister.”
修女一脸惊恐。“官家小姐吃饭时怎么能讨论这种事？珊莎，你的礼貌到哪里去了？我敢对天发誓，最近你快变得跟你妹妹一样坏了。”
“What did Gregor do?” Arya asked.
“格雷果怎么啦？”艾莉亚问。
“He burned down a holdfast and murdered a lot of people, women and children too.”
“他烧毁了一座村庄，杀了很多人，其中还包括女人和小孩。”
Arya screwed up her face in a scowl. “Jaime Lannister murdered Jory and Heward and Wyl, and the Hound murdered Mycah. Somebody should have beheaded them.”
艾莉亚的脸皱成一团。“詹姆·兰尼斯特杀了乔里、海华和韦尔，猎狗杀了米凯，也该有人去砍他们的头。”
“It’s not the same,” Sansa said. “The Hound is Joffrey’s sworn shield. Your butcher’s boy attacked the prince.”
“那不一样，”珊莎说，“猎狗是宣誓保护乔佛里的贴身护卫，而你那杀猪小弟出手攻击王子。”
“Liar,” Arya said. Her hand clenched the blood orange so hard that red juice oozed between her fingers.
“你这个骗子。”艾莉亚说。她的手握紧血橙，红色的果汁从她指缝间汩汩流下。
“Go ahead, call me all the names you want,” Sansa said airily. “You won’t dare when I’m married to Joffrey. You’ll have to bow to me and call me Your Grace.” She shrieked as Arya flung the orange across the table. It caught her in the middle of the forehead with a wet squish and plopped down into her lap.
“你再骂啊，随你怎么骂，”珊莎轻快地说，“等我嫁给乔佛里，看你还敢不敢骂。到时候你就得低头向我行礼，称我为王后陛下了。”
“You have juice on your face, Your Grace,” Arya said.
艾莉亚把血橙从桌子的那头朝她咂过来。珊莎一声尖叫，血橙正中额心，发出湿湿的、压扁的声音，随后扑通落在她膝盖上。
It was running down her nose and stinging her eyes. Sansa wiped it away with a napkin. When she saw what the fruit in her lap had done to her beautiful ivory silk dress, she shrieked again. “You’re horrible,” she screamed at her sister. “They should have killed you instead of Lady!”
“王后陛下，您脸上有果汁耶。”艾莉亚说。
Septa Mordane came lurching to her feet. “Your lord father will hear of this! Go to your chambers, at once. At once!”
果汁流上鼻子，剌痛她的眼睛。珊莎用餐巾把脸抹干净，当她发现果汁已把她漂亮的象牙色丝衣染得一塌糊涂时，她再度高声大叫。“你真是讨厌死了，”她朝妹妹尖叫，“当初他们不该杀淑女，应该杀你才对！”
“Me too?” Tears welled in Sansa’s eyes. “That’s not fair.”
茉丹修女脚步踉跄地站起来。“我要把这件事告诉你们父亲大人！你们马上给我回房间，现在就去！”
“The matter is not subject to discussion. Go!”
“我也要去？”珊莎的眼眶盈满泪水。“不公平嘛。”
Sansa stalked away with her head up. She was to be a queen, and queens did not cry. At least not where people could see. When she reached her bedchamber, she barred the door and took off her dress. The blood orange had left a blotchy red stain on the silk. “I hate her!” she screamed. She balled up the dress and flung it into the cold hearth, on top of the ashes of last night’s fire. When she saw that the stain had bled through onto her underskirt, she began to sob despite herself. She ripped off the rest of her clothes wildly, threw herself into bed, and cried herself back to sleep.
“不要跟我辩，快去！”
It was midday when Septa Mordane knocked upon her door. “Sansa. Your lord father will see you now.”
珊莎昂首离去。她将来是要当王后的，而王后决不轻易掉眼泪。回房之后，她放下门闩，脱去衣服。血橙汁在丝衣上留下一滩红渍。“我恨她！”她放声尖叫，把衣服揉成一团，丢进冷却的壁炉，落在昨夜炉火的灰烬上。这时她发现果汁已经渗进她的衬裙，于是再也无法遏制地啜泣起来。她狂乱地把身上所有的衣物统统撕开，整个人扑倒在床，哭着直到睡着。
Sansa sat up. “Lady,” she whispered. For a moment it was as if the direwolf was there in the room, looking at her with those golden eyes, sad and knowing. She had been dreaming, she realized. Lady was with her, and they were running together, and … and … trying to remember was like trying to catch the rain with her fingers. The dream faded, and Lady was dead again.
等茉丹修女来敲门，已是日正当中。“珊莎。你父亲大人现在要见你。”
“Sansa.” The rap came again, sharply. “Do you hear me?”
珊莎坐起身。“淑女。”她悄声道。有那么一会儿，冰原狼仿佛真的置身屋内，用那双金黄的眼睛凝视着她，哀伤却又善解人意。她知道自己在做梦，但她好想淑女在身边，与她一同奔跑，以及……以及……回忆的企图如同伸手盛接雨水。梦境逸去，淑女又是已死之身。
“Yes, Septa,” she called out. “Might I have a moment to dress, please?” Her eyes were red from crying, but she did her best to make herself beautiful.
“珊莎，”敲门声再度传来，这回相当急促。“你听见没有？”
Lord Eddard was bent over a huge leather-bound book when Septa Mordane marched her into the solar, his plaster-wrapped leg stiff beneath the table. “Come here, Sansa,” he said, not unkindly, when the septa had gone for her sister. “Sit beside me.” He closed the book.
“听见了，修女，”她喊，“能不能给我几分钟换衣服？”她虽然哭红了眼，还是尽力把自己打扮得美美的。
Septa Mordane returned with Arya squirming in her grasp. Sansa had put on a lovely pale green damask gown and a look of remorse, but her sister was still wearing the ratty leathers and roughspun she’d worn at breakfast. “Here is the other one,” the septa announced.
茉丹修女领她走进书房时，艾德公爵正埋首于一本皮革封面的大书中。他打了石膏的腿僵直地伸在桌下。“珊莎，你过来。”修女去找妹妹后，他开了口，脸色并无不悦，“过来坐我旁边。”说着他合上书。
“My thanks, Septa Mordane. I would talk to my daughters alone, if you would be so kind.” The septa bowed and left.
不一会儿茉丹修女把扭来扭去的艾莉亚也抓来了。珊莎换了一件可爱的浅绿色缎子外衣，脸上堆满愧疚之色，但妹妹依旧穿着早餐时那套脏兮兮的皮背心，一身破烂。“这是另一个。”修女宣布。
“Arya started it,” Sansa said quickly, anxious to have the first word. “She called me a liar and threw an orange at me and spoiled my dress, the ivory silk, the one Queen Cersei gave me when I was betrothed to Prince Joffrey. She hates that I’m going to marry the prince. She tries to spoil everything , Father, she can’t stand for anything to be beautiful or nice or splendid.”
“茉丹修女，谢谢你。我想跟我女儿私下谈谈，可否请你让我们独处一下？”修女鞠了个躬离开了。
“Enough , Sansa.” Lord Eddard’s voice was sharp with impatience.
“是艾莉亚先动手的，”珊莎立刻开口，生怕不能抢得先机。“她说我是骗子，然后拿血橙砸我，把我衣服弄脏了。那是瑟曦王后因为我跟乔佛里王子订婚特别送的，象牙色的丝衣呢。我要嫁给王子，她就恨我。什么事到她手里都会搞砸，父亲，她就是见不得任何漂亮的东西。”
Arya raised her eyes. “I’m sorry, Father. I was wrong and I beg my sweet sister’s forgiveness.”
“珊莎，够了。”艾德公爵的声音充满不耐。
Sansa was so startled that for a moment she was speechless. Finally she found her voice. “What about my dress?”
艾莉亚抬眼道：“父亲，对不起，我错了，请好姐姐原谅我。”
“Maybe … I could wash it,” Arya said doubtfully.
珊莎正在气头上，好一阵子说不出话来。最后她总算找回了声音：“那我的衣服怎么办？”
“Washing won’t do any good,” Sansa said. “Not if you scrubbed all day and all night. The silk is ruined.”
“我……或许我可以帮你洗。”艾莉亚不太确定地说。
“Then I’ll … make you a new one,” Arya said.
“怎么洗都没用，”珊莎道，“就算你搓上整天整夜也一样。绸子已经毁了。”
Sansa threw back her head in disdain. “You? You couldn’t sew a dress fit to clean the pigsties.”
“那……我帮你做件新的。”艾莉亚说。
Their father sighed. “I did not call you here to talk of dresses. I’m sending you both back to Winterfell.”
珊莎嫌恶地甩头。“你？你缝的衣服拿去抹猪舍都不配。”
For the second time Sansa found herself too stunned for words. She felt her eyes grow moist again.
父亲叹道：“我不是叫你们来讨论衣服的。我准备送你们回临冬城。”
“You can’t,” Arya said.
珊莎震惊得好几秒钟说不出话，她感觉自己的眼睛又湿了。
“Please, Father,” Sansa managed at last. “Please don’t.”
“不要嘛。”艾莉亚说。
Eddard Stark favored his daughters with a tired smile. “At last we’ve found something you agree on.”
“求求你，父亲大人，”最后珊莎终于说出话，“求求你别这样。”
“I didn’t do anything wrong,” Sansa pleaded with him. “I don’t want to go back.” She loved King’s Landing; the pagaentry of the court, the high lords and ladies in their velvets and silks and gemstones, the great city with all its people. The tournament had been the most magical time of her whole life, and there was so much she had not seen yet, harvest feasts and masked balls and mummer shows. She could not bear the thought of losing it all. “Send Arya away, she started it, Father, I swear it. I’ll be good, you’ll see, just let me stay and I promise to be as fine and noble and courteous as the queen.”
艾德·史塔克对他两个女儿露出一丝疲惫的微笑。“你们总算有点共识了。”
Father’s mouth twitched strangely. “Sansa, I’m not sending you away for fighting, though the gods know I’m sick of you two squabbling. I want you back in Winterfell for your own safety. Three of my men were cut down like dogs not a league from where we sit, and what does Robert do? He goes hunting.”
“我又没犯错，”珊莎哀求他，“我不想回去。”她爱死了君临宫廷的壮观华丽，身披绫罗绸缎的贵族男女，以及城里形形色色的人们。那场比武竞技是她一生中最奇妙的时光，而她还有好些东西没观赏过呢，比如丰收宴会、化妆舞会和默剧表演。想到要失去这一切，她实在受不了。“把艾莉亚送走就好，是她先动手的，父亲，我发誓。我会当个乖女儿，真的，只要你让我留下来，我保证我会像王后一样举止高贵又有礼貌。”
Arya was chewing at her lip in that disgusting way she had. “Can we take Syrio back with us?”
父亲的嘴角怪异地牵动了一下。“珊莎，我不是因为你们吵架才送你们走，虽然我实在也受够了你们成天拌嘴。我是考虑到你们的安危才希望你们回临冬城。我的三名部下在离此不到三里的地方被人像杀狗似地砍倒，结果劳勃怎么做？他跑去打猎！”
“Who cares about your stupid dancing master?” Sansa flared. “Father, I only just now remembered, I can’t go away, I’m to marry Prince Joffrey.” She tried to smile bravely for him. “I love him, Father, I truly truly do, I love him as much as Queen Naerys loved Prince Aemon the Dragonknight, as much as Jonquil loved Ser Florian. I want to be his queen and have his babies.”
艾莉亚正用她那种恶心的方式噘着嘴唇。“我们可以带西利欧一起走吗？”
“Sweet one,” her father said gently, “listen to me. When you’re old enough, I will make you a match with a high lord who’s worthy of you, someone brave and gentle and strong. This match with Joffrey was a terrible mistake. That boy is no Prince Aemon, you must believe me.”
“谁理你的笨舞蹈老师啊？”珊莎怒道，“父亲，我才刚想起来，我不能走啊，我是要嫁给乔佛里王子的。”为了他的缘故，她试着勇敢地微笑。“我爱他，父亲，真的，就像奈丽诗王后爱龙骑士伊蒙王子，琼琪爱佛罗理安那样爱他。我想做他的王后，为他生孩子。”
“He is!” Sansa insisted. “I don’t want someone brave and gentle, I want him . We’ll be ever so happy, just like in the songs, you’ll see. I’ll give him a son with golden hair, and one day he’ll be the king of all the realm, the greatest king that ever was, as brave as the wolf and as proud as the lion.”
“我亲爱的孩子，”父亲轻声说，“听我说，等你长大，我会帮你找个最配得上你的贵族，既勇敢又温柔又强壮。和乔佛里的这桩婚事是个可怕的错误。那小子可不是伊蒙王子，你得相信我。”
Arya made a face. “Not if Joffrey’s his father,” she said. “He’s a liar and a craven and anyhow he’s a stag, not a lion.”
“他当然是！”珊莎坚持，“我才不要什么勇敢温柔又强壮的人，我只要他。我们会像歌谣里唱的那样，永远过着幸福快乐的生活，你到时候就知道了。我要帮他生个金发儿子，有朝一日他会成为一国之君，有史以来最伟大的国王，像奔狼一样勇敢，如雄狮一般骄傲。”
Sansa felt tears in her eyes. “He is not! He’s not the least bit like that old drunken king,” she screamed at her sister, forgetting herself in her grief.
艾莉亚做了个鬼脸。“有乔佛里当老爸不可能啦，”她说，“他既是骗子又是胆小鬼，更何况他是鹿，不是狮子。”
Father looked at her strangely. “Gods,” he swore softly, “out of the mouth of babes …” He shouted for Septa Mordane. To the girls he said, “I am looking for a fast trading galley to take you home. These days, the sea is safer than the kingsroad. You will sail as soon as I can find a proper ship, with Septa Mordane and a complement of guards … and yes, with Syrio Forel, if he agrees to enter my service. But say nothing of this. It’s better if no one knows of our plans. We’ll talk again tomorrow.”
珊莎眼里都是泪水。“他才不是！他一点都不像那酒鬼国王。”她对着妹妹尖叫，悲伤之余完全忘记了礼节。
Sansa cried as Septa Mordane marched them down the steps. They were going to take it all away; the tournaments and the court and her prince, everything, they were going to send her back to the bleak grey walls of Winterfell and lock her up forever. Her life was over before it had begun.
父亲眼神怪异地看着她。“诸神啊，”他轻声咒道，“这话竟从小孩子口中说出来……”他高呼修女进门，然后对两个女孩说：“我打算让你们搭快速商船回家。最近走海路要比国王大道安全。等我找到合适的船，你们就跟茉丹修女和部分侍卫一起出发……如果西利欧·佛瑞尔愿意到我手下做事，也可以带他一起去。这个计划最好不要泄漏，我们明天再谈。”
“Stop that weeping, child,” Septa Mordane said sternly. “I am certain your lord father knows what is best for you.”
茉丹修女领她们走下台阶时，珊莎禁不住哭了。他们要把比武竞技、繁华宫廷和她的白马王子都夺走，叫她搭什么阴森森的鬼船回临冬城，然后把她永远关起来。她的生命还没开始，就要这么结束了。
“It won’t be so bad, Sansa,” Arya said. “We’re going to sail on a galley. It will be an adventure, and then we’ll be with Bran and Robb again, and Old Nan and Hodor and the rest.” She touched her on the arm.
“孩子，别哭哭啼啼了，”茉丹修女严峻地说，“我相信你父亲大人知道怎么做对你最好。”
“Hodor!” Sansa yelled. “You ought to marry Hodor, you’re just like him, stupid and hairy and ugly!” She wrenched away from her sister’s hand, stormed into her bedchamber, and barred the door behind her.
“珊莎，没那么糟啦。”艾莉亚道，“我们要坐船耶，这将是一次大冒险，然后我们就又可以和布兰、罗柏、老奶妈和阿多他们住在一起了。”她碰碰她的手臂。
*EDDARD
“阿多！”珊莎大吼，“你这么笨这么脏这么丑，干脆嫁给阿多算了！”说完她甩开妹妹的手，冲进卧房，用力把身后的门闩上。
“P ain is a gift from the gods, Lord Eddard,” Grand Maester Pycelle told him. “It means the bone is knitting, the flesh healing itself. Be thankful.”
第四十六章 艾德
“I will be thankful when my leg stops throbbing.”
“艾德大人，痛觉是天上诸神的恩赐啊，”派席尔大学士告诉他，“这代表骨头正在逐渐接合，伤口也快要痊愈，您该心存感激才是。”
Pycelle set a stoppered flask on the table by the bed. “The milk of the poppy, for when the pain grows too onerous.”
“等何时我脚不痛了，再来感激也不迟。”
“I sleep too much already.”
派席尔把塞上瓶盖的药罐放在床边的桌上。“这是罂粟花奶，痛得太厉害的时候喝。”
“Sleep is the great healer.”
“我已经睡得太多。”
“I had hoped that was you.”
“睡眠是最好的医生。”
Pycelle smiled wanly. “It is good to see you in such a fierce humor, my lord.” He leaned close and lowered his voice. “There was a raven this morning, a letter for the queen from her lord father. I thought you had best know.”
“我以为好医生是你。”
“Dark wings, dark words,” Ned said grimly. “What of it?”
派席尔满脸倦容地微笑。“大人，很高兴看到您还这么幽默。”他靠过来低声说，“今天早上来了只渡鸦，带来王后她父亲大人的信。我想最好让您知道。”
“Lord Tywin is greatly wroth about the men you sent after Ser Gregor Clegane,” the maester confided. “I feared he would be. You will recall, I said as much in council.”
“黑色的翅膀，黑色的消息。”奈德阴沉地说：“信上怎么说？”
“Let him be wroth,” Ned said. Every time his leg throbbed, he remembered Jaime Lannister’s smile, and Jory dead in his arms. “Let him write all the letters to the queen he likes. Lord Beric rides beneath the king’s own banner. If Lord Tywin attempts to interfere with the king’s justice, he will have Robert to answer to. The only thing His Grace enjoys more than hunting is making war on lords who defy him.”
“泰温大人对您派人去逮捕格雷果·克里冈一事极为愤概。”大学士悄声对他说，“这正好印证我的担心，您应该记得，当初我在朝廷上也提醒过您。”
Pycelle pulled back, his maester’s chain jangling. “As you say. I shall visit again on the morrow.” The old man hurriedly gathered up his things and took his leave. Ned had little doubt that he was bound straight for the royal apartments, to whisper at the queen. I thought you had best know , indeed … as if Cersei had not instructed him to pass along her father’s threats. He hoped his response rattled those perfect teeth of hers. Ned was not near as confident of Robert as he pretended, but there was no reason Cersei need know that.
“让他去愤概。”奈德说。每当他脚伤抽痛，他便会想起詹姆·兰尼斯特的微笑，以及乔里死在他怀中的景况。“他爱写什么给王后是他的事。贝里伯爵打的是国王的旗号，执行的是国王的律法，要是泰温大人敢插手干预，那他就得向劳勃负责。如果说这世上还有什么比打猎更能吸引陛下，莫过于率军讨伐违抗命令的臣下了。”
When Pycelle was gone, Ned called for a cup of honeyed wine. That clouded the mind as well, yet not as badly. He needed to be able to think. A thousand times, he asked himself what Jon Arryn might have done, had he lived long enough to act on what he’d learned. Or perhaps he had acted, and died for it.
派席尔抽回身子，脖子上的锁链吭啷作响。“如您所言。我明天再来看看。”老人收拾东西很快离去。奈德想也知道他八成会直奔王家居室，把他的反应通报王后。好个“我想最好让您知道”……说得一副瑟曦没有特别吩咐他把她父亲的恐吓说出来似的。他希望自己的回答能让她咬牙切齿。实际上奈德对劳勃并不如他表面上显示的那么有信心，但没必要让瑟曦知道。
It was queer how sometimes a child’s innocent eyes can see things that grown men are blind to. Someday, when Sansa was grown, he would have to tell her how she had made it all come clear for him. He’s not the least bit like that old drunken king , she had declared, angry and unknowing, and the simple truth of it had twisted inside him, cold as death. This was the sword that killed Jon Arryn , Ned thought then, and it will kill Robert as well, a slower death but full as certain . Shattered legs may heal in time, but some betrayals fester and poison the soul.
派席尔走后，奈德要来一杯掺蜂蜜的酒。这东西喝了同样会干扰神智，却没那么严重。他必须保持思绪明晰。他问过自己一千遍：假如琼恩。艾林得知真相后没被人害死，他接下来会采取什么行动？话说回来，说不定他采取过行动，却因此而丧命。
Littlefinger came calling an hour after the Grand Maester had left, clad in a plum-colored doublet with a mockingbird embroidered on the breast in black thread, and a striped cloak of black and white. “I cannot visit long, my lord,” he announced. “Lady Tanda expects me to lunch with her. No doubt she will roast me a fatted calf. If it’s near as fatted as her daughter, I’m like to rupture and die. And how is your leg?”
说来奇怪，有时候孩子无知的眼睛，反而能看到成年人视而不见的事实。总有一天，等珊莎长大，他一定要告诉她，她的一句话是如何为他拨开了重重疑云。她在一无所知的情况下，说出“他一点都不像那酒鬼国王”这句气话，单纯的真相顿时在他胸口翻涌，冰冷一如死亡。这就是杀死琼恩·艾林的那把剑，当时奈德便想，这把剑同样也会杀死劳勃，或许比较慢，但绝对是迟早的事。断腿终会愈合，然而某些背叛却会逐渐腐蚀灵魂。
“Inflamed and painful, with an itch that is driving me mad.”
国师离开后不到一小时，小指头身穿胸前用黑线绣有仿声鸟的李子色外衣，披着黑白相间的条纹披风前来造访。“大人，我不能久留，”他进门便说，“坦妲伯爵夫人等着我共进午餐，想必会特地为我烤只肥牛。呵，如果那只牛跟她女儿一样肥，我吃了八成会活活胀死。您的脚可还好？”
Littlefinger lifted an eyebrow. “In future, try not to let any horses fall on it. I would urge you to heal quickly. The realm grows restive. Varys has heard ominous whispers from the west. Freeriders and sellswords have been flocking to Casterly Rock, and not for the thin pleasure of Lord Tywin’s conversation.”
“又痛又痒，快把我逼疯了。”
“Is there word of the king?” Ned demanded. “Just how long does Robert intend to hunt?”
小指头抬起一边眉毛。“从今往后，没事别让马压到。我劝你赶紧好起来，国内情势越来越不安定。瓦里斯听到不少从西边传来的坏消息，流浪武士和自由骑手正朝凯岩城蜂拥而去，他们可不是和泰温大人聊天去的。”
“Given his preferences, I believe he’d stay in the forest until you and the queen both die of old age,” Lord Petyr replied with a faint smile. “Lacking that, I imagine he’ll return as soon as he’s killed something. They found the white hart, it seems … or rather, what remained of it. Some wolves found it first, and left His Grace scarcely more than a hoof and a horn. Robert was in a fury, until he heard talk of some monstrous boar deeper in the forest. Then nothing would do but he must have it. Prince Joffrey returned this morning, with the Royces, Ser Balon Swann, and some twenty others of the party. The rest are still with the king.”
“国王那边有消息吗？”奈德问，“劳勃到底要打猎到什么时候？”
“The Hound?” Ned asked, frowning. Of all the Lannister party, Sandor Clegane was the one who concerned him the most, now that Ser Jaime had fled the city to join his father.
“若是依他的意，我想他会待在森林里，等你和王后都老死了才回来。”培提尔浅浅一笑。“既然这不可能，大概等杀到猎物他就会回来罢。他们找到了那只白鹿……噢，应该说找到了白鹿的残骸。有些狼捷足先登，只留给国王陛下一只鹿蹄和一只鹿角。劳勃气坏了，随后他听说森林深处有只怪物般的大熊，这时怎么也拦不住他啦。乔佛里王子，罗伊斯家的人，巴隆·史文，以及其他二十几号人今早上回来了。其他人陪着国王继续打猎。”
“Oh, returned with Joffrey, and went straight to the queen.” Littlefinger smiled. “I would have given a hundred silver stags to have been a roach in the rushes when he learned that Lord Beric was off to behead his brother.”
“猎狗呢？”奈德皱眉问。眼下詹姆爵士业已逃出城去和他父亲会师，兰尼斯特家的人里面，就数桑铎·克里冈最教他担心。
“Even a blind man could see the Hound loathed his brother.”
“喔，他跟乔佛里一道回来，他们直接奔王后那儿去了。”小指头微笑，“等他知道贝里大人带兵去杀他老哥的时候，我宁可花一百枚银鹿变成草丛里的蟑螂。”
“Ah, but Gregor was his to loathe, not yours to kill. Once Dondarrion lops the summit off our Mountain, the Clegane lands and incomes will pass to Sandor, but I wouldn’t hold my water waiting for his thanks, not that one. And now you must forgive me. Lady Tanda awaits with her fatted calves.”
“就算瞎子也看得出猎狗恨透他哥哥。”
On the way to the door, Lord Petyr spied Grand Maester Malleon’s massive tome on the table and paused to idly flip open the cover. “The Lineages and Histories of the Great Houses of the Seven Kingdoms, With Descriptions of Many High Lords and Noble Ladies and Their Children,” he read. “Now there is tedious reading if ever I saw it. A sleeping potion, my lord?”
“是啊，可是格雷果也只有他能恨，轮不到你杀。待唐德利恩削平魔山的山峰，克里冈家族的领地与税赋自然会传给桑铎，但别奢望他跟你道谢啦，绝对不会。抱歉，我真的该走了，坦妲伯爵夫人和她的肥牛还等着我呢。”
For a brief moment Ned considered telling him all of it, but there was something in Littlefinger’s japes that irked him. The man was too clever by half, a mocking smile never far from his lips. “Jon Arryn was studying this volume when he was taken sick,” Ned said in a careful tone, to see how he might respond.
还没到门边，培提尔瞥见桌上那本梅利恩国师的厚重巨著，便停下来，随意翻开封面。“《七国主要贵族之世家谱系与历史（内附许多关于爵爷夫人和他们子女的描述）》，”他念道，“这可真是我见过的最无聊的东西了。大人，敢情您用这来帮助入眠？”
And he responded as he always did: with a quip. “In that case,” he said, “death must have come as a blessed relief.” Lord Petyr Baelish bowed and took his leave.
有那么一瞬间，奈德犹豫要不要把实情告诉他，但小指头的玩笑令他生厌。这家伙老是自以为机灵，那抹促狭的微笑从来不离唇边。“琼恩·艾林生病时读的就是这本书。”奈德谨慎地说，打算试探对方的反应。
Eddard Stark allowed himself a curse. Aside from his own retainers, there was scarcely a man in this city he trusted. Littlefinger had concealed Catelyn and helped Ned in his inquiries, yet his haste to save his own skin when Jaime and his swords had come out of the rain still rankled. Varys was worse. For all his protestations of loyalty, the eunuch knew too much and did too little. Grand Maester Pycelle seemed more Cersei’s creature with every passing day, and Ser Barristan was an old man, and rigid. He would tell Ned to do his duty.
他果然一如既往地耍了个嘴皮子。“若是这样，”他说，“那死还真算得上解脱。”语毕培提尔·贝里席伯爵鞠躬离去。
Time was perilously short. The king would return from his hunt soon, and honor would require Ned to go to him with all he had learned. Vayon Poole had arranged for Sansa and Arya to sail on the Wind Witch out of Braavos, three days hence. They would be back at Winterfell before the harvest. Ned could no longer use his concern for their safety to excuse his delay.
艾德·史塔克容许自己咒骂了一句。除了自己的手下，城里无人可以信任。小指头虽曾帮忙藏匿凯特琳，也协助奈德明查暗访，然而当詹姆和他手下出现时，他那幅急于自保的嘴脸，至今依旧历历如绘。瓦里斯更糟。他成天强调自己忠心耿耿，事实上他知道的太多，真正去做的却太少。派席尔国师越看越像瑟曦的走狗，巴利斯坦爵士则年事已高，又食古不化，多半会告诉奈德管好份内之事即可。
Yet last night he had dreamt of Rhaegar’s children. Lord Tywin had laid the bodies beneath the Iron Throne, wrapped in the crimson cloaks of his house guard. That was clever of him; the blood did not show so badly against the red cloth. The little princess had been barefoot, still dressed in her bed gown, and the boy … the boy …
时间异常紧迫，待国王游猎归来，出于荣誉，奈德非得向他吐露实情不可。维扬·普尔已经安排好珊莎和艾莉亚三天后搭乘布拉佛斯的风之巫女号离开，奈德再也无法以她们的安危作为自己拖延的借口。
Ned could not let that happen again. The realm could not withstand a second mad king, another dance of blood and vengeance. He must find some way to save the children.
然而昨夜他却梦见了雷加的孩子。泰温公爵将尸首用他侍卫的红披风裹好，放在铁王座下。这么做颇为聪明，因为包着红布，血迹便不太明显。小公主死时光着脚，身上穿着睡衣，而那男孩……那男孩……。
Robert could be merciful. Ser Barristan was scarcely the only man he had pardoned. Grand Maester Pycelle, Varys the Spider, Lord Balon Greyjoy; each had been counted an enemy to Robert once, and each had been welcomed into friendship and allowed to retain honors and office for a pledge of fealty. So long as a man was brave and honest, Robert would treat him with all the honor and respect due a valiant enemy.
奈德绝不能让类似的事情重演。王国再不能出现第二个丧心病狂的国王，更经不起又一次充满仇恨的腥风血雨。他得想办法保护那几个孩子。
This was something else: poison in the dark, a knife thrust to the soul. This he could never forgive, no more than he had forgiven Rhaegar. He will kill them all , Ned realized.
劳勃是很可以表现仁慈的人。巴利斯坦爵士并非他惟一赦免的对象。派席尔国师，“八爪蜘蛛”瓦里斯，巴隆·葛雷乔伊……他们个个曾与劳勃为敌，然而一旦宣誓效忠，也都能得到友谊的拥抱，保留自己的荣誉。只要对方表现英勇，行事正直，劳勃便会将他当成勇敢的对手，尊敬有加。
And yet, he knew he could not keep silent. He had a duty to Robert, to the realm, to the shade of Jon Arryn … and to Bran, who surely must have stumbled on some part of the truth. Why else would they have tried to slay him?
然而这次情况有别：暗中下毒，背后捅刀，这种事他绝对无法原谅，就像他始终无法原谅雷加。我要教他们像龙一样死得干净彻底，奈德想起劳勃的话。
Late that afternoon he summoned Tomard, the portly guardsman with the ginger-colored whiskers his children called Fat Tom. With Jory dead and Alyn gone, Fat Tom had command of his household guard. The thought filled Ned with vague disquiet. Tomard was a solid man; affable, loyal, tireless, capable in a limited way, but he was near fifty, and even in his youth he had never been energetic. Perhaps Ned should not have been so quick to send off half his guard, and all his best swords among them.
即便如此，他依旧无法保持沉默。他要对劳勃负责，更要对整个国家，对死去的琼恩·艾林……对布兰负责。那孩子肯定是无意之中听见部分事实，否则他们何必杀他灭口？
“I shall require your help,” Ned said when Tomard appeared, looking faintly apprehensive, as he always did when called before his lord. “Take me to the godswood.”
当天傍晚，他把身材粗壮，留着淡黄胡须，被他的孩子们戏称为“胖汤姆”的守卫托马德找来。由于乔里已死，埃林又出门在外，胖汤姆便成了他的侍卫队长。想到这奈德觉得些微不安，托马德是个很可靠的人，待人和蔼可亲，忠心耿耿，不辞辛劳，某些地方还算能干，但他已年近五十，而即使年轻时也算不上精力充沛。或许奈德不该这么轻易地送走半数侍卫，那些可都是他手下最精良的战士。
“Is that wise, Lord Eddard? With your leg and all?”
“我需要你帮忙，”托马德进门时，奈德对他说。胖汤姆每当被主人传唤，总有些惴惴不安，这回也不例外。“扶我去神木林。”
“Perhaps not. But necessary.”
“艾德大人，这样好吗？您脚这个样子……”
Tomard summoned Varly. With one arm around each man’s shoulders, Ned managed to descend the steep tower steps and hobble across the bailey. “I want the guard doubled,” he told Fat Tom. “No one enters or leaves the Tower of the Hand without my leave.”
“或许不好，但我必须这么做。”
Tom blinked. “M’lord, with Alyn and the others away, we are hard-pressed already—”
托马德叫来瓦利，奈德一手扶一人的肩膀，勉强走下高塔陡峭的楼梯，跛着脚穿过内城。“将守卫班次加倍，”他告诉胖汤姆。“未经我允许，任何人不准进出首相塔。”
“It will only be a short while. Lengthen the watches.”
汤姆眨眨眼。“老爷，眼下少了埃林他们，我们的人手很吃紧——”
“As you say, m’lord,” Tom answered. “Might I ask why—”
“不用多久。暂时延长值班时间。”
“Best not,” Ned answered crisply.
“遵命，老爷。”汤姆回答，“我能否询问——”
The godswood was empty, as it always was here in this citadel of the southron gods. Ned’s leg was screaming as they lowered him to the grass beside the heart tree. “Thank you.” He drew a paper from his sleeve, sealed with the sigil of his House. “Kindly deliver this at once.”
“最好不要。”奈德立时回答。
Tomard looked at the name Ned had written on the paper and licked his lips anxiously. “My lord …”
神木林里空无一人，信仰南方诸神的城堡中，向来如此。等他们在心树旁的草地把他放下，他的脚已经痛得撕心裂肺。“谢谢。”他从袖子里取出一张用家徽印章封好的纸。“麻烦你们立刻把它送去。”
“Do as I bid you, Tom,” Ned said.
托马德望见奈德写在纸上的名字，不安地舔舔嘴唇。“老爷……”
How long he waited in the quiet of the godswood, he could not say. It was peaceful here. The thick walls shut out the clamor of the castle, and he could hear birds singing, the murmur of crickets, leaves rustling in a gentle wind. The heart tree was an oak, brown and faceless, yet Ned Stark still felt the presence of his gods. His leg did not seem to hurt so much.
“汤姆，你照办就是。”奈德说。
She came to him at sunset, as the clouds reddened above the walls and towers. She came alone, as he had bid her. For once she was dressed simply, in leather boots and hunting greens. When she drew back the hood of her brown cloak, he saw the bruise where the king had struck her. The angry plum color had faded to yellow, and the swelling was down, but there was no mistaking it for anything but what it was.
他不知自己在神木林的静谧中等了多久。这里安详而宁静。厚重的围墙阻隔了城堡里的人马喧腾，他听见虫鸣鸟叫，听见叶子在风中瑟瑟作响。此地的心树是一棵棕色橡木，虽然没有刻脸，但奈德依旧可以感觉他所信仰的无名诸神的存在。脚也似乎不那么痛了。
“Why here?” Cersei Lannister asked as she stood over him.
日落时分她才姗姗来临，塔楼高墙上的云朵已经披上红霞。她依约独自前来，难得地衣着朴素，只穿了皮靴和绿色猎衣。当她掀开棕色斗篷的兜帽，他看见国王打她的地方。原本怒放的李子色已经褪为黄色，肿也消去，然而她的遭遇依旧一目了然。
“So the gods can see.”
“为什么在这里？”瑟曦·兰尼斯特站在他面前，高高在上地问。
She sat beside him on the grass. Her every move was graceful. Her curling blond hair moved in the wind, and her eyes were green as the leaves of summer. It had been a long time since Ned Stark had seen her beauty, but he saw it now. “I know the truth Jon Arryn died for,” he told her.
“好让天上诸神作见证。”
“Do you?” The queen watched his face, wary as a cat. “Is that why you called me here, Lord Stark? To pose me riddles? Or is it your intent to seize me, as your wife seized my brother?”
她在他身畔的草地坐下，一举一动都优雅异常。她蜷曲的金发在风中轻舞，碧绿双眸一如盛夏的繁叶。奈德·史塔克已有许久不曾见识她的美貌，如今又再度唤起。“我知道琼恩·艾林是为什么死的。”他告诉她。
“If you truly believed that, you would never have come.” Ned touched her cheek gently. “Has he done this before?”
“是吗？”王后审视着他的脸，如灵猫一般小心翼翼。“史塔克大人，您就为这把我叫来？跟我猜谜语？还是您想学尊夫人挟持我弟弟一样挟持我？”
“Once or twice.” She shied away from his hand. “Never on the face before. Jaime would have killed him, even if it meant his own life.” Cersei looked at him defiantly. “My brother is worth a hundred of your friend.”
“你真这样以为，就不会来了。”奈德轻轻碰触她脸颊。“他以前打过你吗？”
“Your brother?” Ned said. “Or your lover?”
“有一两次，”她别过去。“但没打过脸，否则就算是自身难保，詹姆也会跟他拼命。”瑟曦神情挑衅地看着他，“我弟弟胜过你朋友一百倍。”
“Both.” She did not flinch from the truth. “Since we were children together. And why not? The Targaryens wed brother to sister for three hundred years, to keep the bloodlines pure. And Jaime and I are more than brother and sister. We are one person in two bodies. We shared a womb together. He came into this world holding my foot, our old maester said. When he is in me, I feel … whole.” The ghost of a smile flitted over her lips.
“你弟弟？”奈德说，“还是你爱人？”
“My son Bran …”
“两者都是。”面对真相，她脸上毫无异色。“我们从小就在一起。有何不可？坦格利安家三百年来都是兄妹通婚，以保持血统纯正。詹姆和我不只是姐弟，我们根本是分成两半的同一个生命，我们共享同一子宫。据我们家老师傅说，他托着我的脚方才来到人世。当我俩结合的时候，我才……觉得自己完整。”她的唇上隐约掠过一抹微笑。
To her credit, Cersei did not look away. “He saw us. You love your children, do you not?”
“我儿子布兰他……？”
Robert had asked him the very same question, the morning of the melee. He gave her the same answer. “With all my heart.”
瑟曦坦然面对，没有回避。“他看见我们在一起。你很爱你的孩子，对不对？”
“No less do I love mine.”
团体比武当天早上，劳勃问过他一模一样的问题。他给了她相同的答案。“我全心全意地爱他们。”
Ned thought, If it came to that, the life of some child I did not know, against Robb and Sansa and Arya and Bran and Rickon, what would I do? Even more so, what would Catelyn do, if it were Jon’s life, against the children of her body? He did not know. He prayed he never would.
“我也是这么爱着自己的孩子。”
“All three are Jaime’s,” he said. It was not a question.
奈德心想：倘若换成别的小孩威胁到罗柏、珊莎、艾莉亚、布兰或瑞肯的生命，他会怎么做？甚或，倘若琼恩威胁到她亲生孩子的性命，凯特琳又会怎么办？他不知道，他祈祷自己永远不要知道。
“Thank the gods.”
“他们三个都是詹姆的孩子。”他说，这并非提问。
The seed is strong , Jon Arryn had cried on his deathbed, and so it was. All those bastards, all with hair as black as night. Grand Maester Malleon recorded the last mating between stag and lion, some ninety years ago, when Tya Lannister wed Gowen Baratheon, third son of the reigning lord. Their only issue, an unnamed boy described in Malleon’s tome as a large and lusty lad born with a full head of black hair , died in infancy. Thirty years before that a male Lannister had taken a Baratheon maid to wife. She had given him three daughters and a son, each black-haired. No matter how far back Ned searched in the brittle yellowed pages, always he found the gold yielding before the coal.
“感谢天上诸神。”
“A dozen years,” Ned said. “How is it that you have had no children by the king?”
种性强韧，琼恩·艾林临死前如此大喊，事实的确如此。每一个私生子的头发都漆黑如夜。梅利恩记录了九十多年前雄鹿和狮子间最后一次结合，蒂亚·兰尼斯特嫁给葛文·拜拉席恩——他在本家排行老三。他们惟一的孩子是个无有名字的早夭男婴，梅利恩的书中如此描述：“个头大，食量佳，满头黑发。”再往前三十年，一位兰尼斯特家的男性娶了拜拉席恩家的女孩为妻。她为他生了三个女儿、一个儿子，全部皆为黑发。不管奈德在薄脆的泛黄书页间如何向前追溯，金黄一遇炭黑永远只有屈服的份。
She lifted her head, defiant. “Your Robert got me with child once,” she said, her voice thick with contempt. “My brother found a woman to cleanse me. He never knew. If truth be told, I can scarcely bear for him to touch me, and I have not let him inside me for years. I know other ways to pleasure him, when he leaves his whores long enough to stagger up to my bedchamber. Whatever we do, the king is usually so drunk that he’s forgotten it all by the next morning.”
“你们结婚十多年，”奈德道，“怎么会没有孩子？”
How could they have all been so blind? The truth was there in front of them all the time, written on the children’s faces. Ned felt sick. “I remember Robert as he was the day he took the throne, every inch a king,” he said quietly. “A thousand other women might have loved him with all their hearts. What did he do to make you hate him so?”
她倔傲地抬起头。“你那劳勃让我怀过一次孕，”她的口气充满轻蔑。“我弟弟找了个女人帮我把孩子清理掉。他根本不知道这回事。真要我说，我完全无法忍受他碰我一根汗毛。我们已经很多年没有行房了。他要是稍微远离他那些婊子，喝完酒还能跌跌撞撞地找到我房间，我也有其他方法满足他。反正不管我们做些什么，国王通常烂醉如泥，隔天就忘得一干二净。”
Her eyes burned, green fire in the dusk, like the lioness that was her sigil. “The night of our wedding feast, the first time we shared a bed, he called me by your sister’s name. He was on top of me, in me, stinking of wine, and he whispered Lyanna.”
他们怎能如此盲目？事实从头到尾摆在眼前，清清楚楚写在孩子们的脸上，而他们却视若无睹。奈德觉得一阵反胃。“我记得劳勃初登王位那天的模样，完全是翩翩王者风范。”他静静地说，“成千上万的女人都会全心全意爱他，他到底做了什么，让你恨成这样？”
Ned Stark thought of pale blue roses, and for a moment he wanted to weep. “I do not know which of you I pity most.”
她的双眼燃起暮色中的绿火，宛如她家徽的母狮。“我们新婚当晚，初次同床共枕，他叫的却是你妹妹的名字。他压在我身上，进到我体内，浑身酒臭，他竟然悄悄念着‘莱安娜’。”
The queen seemed amused by that. “Save your pity for yourself, Lord Stark. I want none of it.”
奈德·史塔克想起碧蓝的玫瑰，一时间只觉泫然欲泣。“我真不知该可怜你还是可怜他。”
“You know what I must do.”
王后似乎觉得这话颇为有趣。“史塔克大人，省省力气可怜你自己罢。我不需要。”
“Must!” She put her hand on his good leg, just above the knee. “A true man does what he will, not what he must.” Her fingers brushed lightly against his thigh, the gentlest of promises. “The realm needs a strong Hand. Joff will not come of age for years. No one wants war again, least of all me.” Her hand touched his face, his hair. “If friends can turn to enemies, enemies can become friends. Your wife is a thousand leagues away, and my brother has fled. Be kind to me, Ned. I swear to you, you shall never regret it.”
“你很清楚我必须怎么做。”
“Did you make the same offer to Jon Arryn?”
“必须怎么做？”她朝他没受伤的脚伸出手，搁在刚过膝盖的地方。“一个真实的人做他想做的事，而不是他必须做的事。”她的手指轻轻拂过他的大腿，带着最温柔的暗示。“离小乔成年还有好些年，国家需要一个强有力的首相。没人想重启战端，我尤其不想。”她的手拂过他的脸庞和头发，“倘若朋友可以反目成仇，我们为何不能化敌为友？尊夫人远在千里之外，我弟弟也不在城中。奈德，对我好一点，我发誓绝不让你后悔。”
She slapped him.
“你当初也是这么向琼恩·艾林提议吗？”
“I shall wear that as a badge of honor,” Ned said dryly.
她甩了他一个耳光。
“Honor,” she spat. “How dare you play the noble lord with me! What do you take me for? You’ve a bastard of your own, I’ve seen him. Who was the mother, I wonder? Some Dornish peasant you raped while her holdfast burned? A whore? Or was it the grieving sister, the Lady Ashara? She threw herself into the sea, I’m told. Why was that? For the brother you slew, or the child you stole? Tell me, my honorable Lord Eddard, how are you any different from Robert, or me, or Jaime?”
“我会把这当成荣誉的奖章。”奈德冷冷地说。
“For a start,” said Ned, “I do not kill children. You would do well to listen, my lady. I shall say this only once. When the king returns from his hunt, I intend to lay the truth before him. You must be gone by then. You and your children, all three, and not to Casterly Rock. If I were you, I should take ship for the Free Cities, or even farther, to the Summer Isles or the Port of Ibben. As far as the winds blow.”
“去你的荣誉，”她啐道，“少给我道貌岸然！你把我当什么了？你自己也有个私生子，我亲眼见过。我很好奇他的母亲是谁？是不是哪个家园被你放火烧掉，随后被你强奸的多恩农家女？还是个婊子？或者是那个哀伤的妹妹，亚夏拉小姐？我听说，当你将拂晓神剑那把‘黎明’送还给她后，她便从城墙投海自尽，这到底是什么缘故啊？是因为被你所杀的哥哥，还是被你偷走的孩子？告诉我啊，最讲究荣誉的艾德大人，你和劳勃，或是我，或是詹姆，究竟有什么差别？”
“Exile,” she said. “A bitter cup to drink from.”
“别的不说，”奈德说，“至少我不杀孩子。夫人，请您听好，我话只说一遍。等国王打猎归来，我准备把事情原原本本地告诉他。在这之前你一定得走，带着孩子一起走，三个都带。不要回凯岩城，如果我是你，我会搭船去自由贸易城邦，或是走得更远，到盛夏群岛或伊班港，能跑多远就跑多远。”
“A sweeter cup than your father served Rhaegar’s children,” Ned said, “and kinder than you deserve. Your father and your brothers would do well to go with you. Lord Tywin’s gold will buy you comfort and hire swords to keep you safe. You shall need them. I promise you, no matter where you flee, Robert’s wrath will follow you, to the back of beyond if need be.”
“你要我自我放逐，”她说，“这是杯难以下咽的苦酒。”
The queen stood. “And what of my wrath, Lord Stark?” she asked softly. Her eyes searched his face. “You should have taken the realm for yourself. It was there for the taking. Jaime told me how you found him on the Iron Throne the day King’s Landing fell, and made him yield it up. That was your moment. All you needed to do was climb those steps, and sit. Such a sad mistake.”
“比起令尊给雷加小孩的那杯，算是好的了，”奈德道，“也比你原本应得的好。令尊和你弟弟最好也能一起走，泰温大人的财产足够让你们过舒服日子，还可以雇人保你们安全。你会需要的。我跟你保证，无论你逃得多远，劳勃的怒火都会尾随而至，追你到天涯海角。”
“I have made more mistakes than you can possibly imagine,” Ned said, “but that was not one of them.”
王后站起来。“那我的怒火又怎么办，史塔克大人？”她轻声问，目光在他脸上搜索。“王位近在咫尺，你只需伸手便可夺取天下。詹姆跟我说过，君临城陷那天，你发现他坐在铁王座上，便要求他交出王位。那是你千载难逢的机会，你只需爬上阶梯，坐上王位。可悲啊，可悲的错误。”
“Oh, but it was, my lord,” Cersei insisted. “When you play the game of thrones, you win or you die. There is no middle ground.”
“我这辈子犯过的错，超乎你的想像。”奈德说，“然而这却不是其中之一。”
She turned up her hood to hide her swollen face and left him there in the dark beneath the oak, amidst the quiet of the godswood, under a blue-black sky. The stars were coming out.
“噢，大人，这当然是，”瑟曦坚持，“在权力的游戏之中，你不当赢家，就只有死路一条，没有中间地带。”
*DAENERYS
她拉上兜帽，遮住浮肿的脸，快步离开，留下他独自坐在橡树的阴影下，置身神木林的静谧之中。头顶的黑蓝天空里，星星逐渐出来了。
T he heart was steaming in the cool evening air when Khal Drogo set it before her, raw and bloody. His arms were red to the elbow. Behind him, his bloodriders knelt on the sand beside the corpse of the wild stallion, stone knives in their hands. The stallion’s blood looked black in the flickering orange glare of the torches that ringed the high chalk walls of the pit.
第四十七章 丹妮莉丝
Dany touched the soft swell of her belly. Sweat beaded her skin and trickled down her brow. She could feel the old women watching her, the ancient crones of Vaes Dothrak, with eyes that shone dark as polished flint in their wrinkled faces. She must not flinch or look afraid. I am the blood of the dragon , she told herself as she took the stallion’s heart in both hands, lifted it to her mouth, and plunged her teeth into the tough, stringy flesh.
卓戈卡奥把血淋淋的心脏置于她面前，这颗心冒出的热气在夜晚的冷气里蒸腾。他两手红至肘部。身后，他的血盟卫手拿石制短刀，单膝跪在野马尸体旁的沙地上。环绕坑穴的粉白高墙火炬摇曳，橙焰将骏马的血映成漆黑。
Warm blood filled her mouth and ran down over her chin. The taste threatened to gag her, but she made herself chew and swallow. The heart of a stallion would make her son strong and swift and fearless, or so the Dothraki believed, but only if the mother could eat it all. If she choked on the blood or retched up the flesh, the omens were less favorable; the child might be stillborn, or come forth weak, deformed, or female.
丹妮轻抚隆起的小腹。汗水在肌肤表面凝结，自她额际流下。她感觉得出维斯·多斯拉克的年迈老妪正看着她，她们爬满皱纹的脸上，眼睛如磨亮的燧石闪着黑光。她不能退缩，不能畏惧。“我是真龙传人，”她一边双手捧起马心，一边这么告诉自己。随后她把马心举到嘴边，用尽力气，朝坚韧的生肉咬去。
Her handmaids had helped her ready herself for the ceremony. Despite the tender mother’s stomach that had afflicted her these past two moons, Dany had dined on bowls of half-clotted blood to accustom herself to the taste, and Irri made her chew strips of dried horseflesh until her jaws were aching. She had starved herself for a day and a night before the ceremony in the hopes that hunger would help her keep down the raw meat.
温热的鲜血溢满口中，自她下巴流下。味道几乎令她作呕，但她强忍着继续咀嚼，继续吞咽。多斯拉克人相信，马心能使儿子体魄强健、身手敏捷、无所畏惧，但作母亲的必须吃下整颗心。假如她被血呛到，或者把肉吐出，便是不祥预兆：胎儿可能流产，或先天多病，畸形，甚至是生女儿。
The wild stallion’s heart was all muscle, and Dany had to worry it with her teeth and chew each mouthful a long time. No steel was permitted within the sacred confines of Vaes Dothrak, beneath the shadow of the Mother of Mountains; she had to rip the heart apart with teeth and nails. Her stomach roiled and heaved, yet she kept on, her face smeared with the heartsblood that sometimes seemed to explode against her lips.
为了这次仪式，她的女仆们已帮她做过精心准备。过去这两个月，丹妮虽因害喜身体不适，却还是以一碗碗半凝固的血块为食，让自己习惯血腥味。伊丽把一片片的马肉拿给她嚼，直到她双颊发痛。仪式举行之前，她还特别一整天不进食，希望饥饿能帮助她吞咽生肉。
Khal Drogo stood over her as she ate, his face as hard as a bronze shield. His long black braid was shiny with oil. He wore gold rings in his mustache, gold bells in his braid, and a heavy belt of solid gold medallions around his waist, but his chest was bare. She looked at him whenever she felt her strength failing; looked at him, and chewed and swallowed, chewed and swallowed, chewed and swallowed. Toward the end, Dany thought she glimpsed a fierce pride in his dark, almond-shaped eyes, but she could not be sure. The khal’s face did not often betray the thoughts within.
野生骏马的心全是结实的肌肉，丹妮得用牙齿竭力撕咬，细嚼慢咽才能吞下。圣母山笼罩下的圣城维斯·多斯拉克严禁刀械，所以她只能用牙齿和指甲撕开马心。她的胃里阵阵翻腾，但她咬牙坚持，还必须忍受不时喷溅到脸上的马血。
And finally it was done. Her cheeks and fingers were sticky as she forced down the last of it. Only then did she turn her eyes back to the old women, the crones of the dosh khaleen .
卓戈卡奥高高地站在一旁，看着她吃，那张脸严峻得像青铜盾牌。他长长的黑发辫闪着油亮光泽，小胡子里挂了金环，发辫扎着铃铛，一条沉甸甸的金章腰带系在腰间，胸膛却是赤裸。每当她觉得力量渐失，便抬头望他，然后继续咬牙切齿、咀嚼吞咽。末了，她仿佛在他杏仁状的黑眼瞳里，瞥见了某种坚毅的骄傲，但她不敢确定。无论卡奥心绪为何，他都很少显现于色。
“Khalakka dothrae mr’anha!” she proclaimed in her best Dothraki. A prince rides inside me! She had practiced the phrase for days with her handmaid Jhiqui.
终于结束了。她吞下最后一块马肉，双颊和手指早已僵麻。这时她才敢将视线转回到那群老妇人，亦即多希卡林的老妪们身上。
The oldest of the crones, a bent and shriveled stick of a woman with a single black eye, raised her arms on high. “Khalakka dothrae!” she shrieked. The prince is riding!
“卡拉喀，多斯雷，姆安哈！”她用自己最标准的多斯拉克语说，意思是：王子在我体内骑马！多日以来，她和女仆姬琪反复练习这句话。
“He is riding!” the other women answered. “Rakh! Rakh! Rakh haj!” they proclaimed. A boy, a boy, a strong boy .
老妪中最年迈的一位，一个弯腰驼背，骨瘦如柴，只剩一只黑眼的老女人双手高举。“卡拉喀，多斯雷！”她厉声叫道，意思是：王子骑着马！
Bells rang, a sudden clangor of bronze birds. A deep-throated warhorn sounded its long low note. The old women began to chant. Underneath their painted leather vests, their withered dugs swayed back and forth, shiny with oil and sweat. The eunuchs who served them threw bundles of dried grasses into a great bronze brazier, and clouds of fragrant smoke rose up toward the moon and the stars. The Dothraki believed the stars were horses made of fire, a great herd that galloped across the sky by night.
“他骑着马！”另一个女人应道，“拉克！拉克！拉克哈！”她们齐声宣布：是个男孩，是个男孩，是个强壮的男孩。
As the smoke ascended, the chanting died away and the ancient crone closed her single eye, the better to peer into the future. The silence that fell was complete. Dany could hear the distant call of night birds, the hiss and crackle of the torches, the gentle lapping of water from the lake. The Dothraki stared at her with eyes of night, waiting.
铃声作响，宛如一阵突如其来的青铜鸟鸣。军号奏出低沉的长音，老妇们开始吟唱。在彩绘皮背心下，她们干瘪的乳房来回晃动，闪着油亮汗光。负责伺候她们的太监把一捆捆干草丢进青铜大火盆，顷刻间散发出浓郁的草香，烟雾向天上的月亮星辰直冲而去。在多斯拉克人眼里，星星就是一群以烈火为躯，声势浩大，奔跑夜空的骏马。
Khal Drogo laid his hand on Dany’s arm. She could feel the tension in his fingers. Even a khal as mighty as Drogo could know fear when the dosh khaleen peered into smoke of the future. At her back, her handmaids fluttered anxiously.
当浓烟渐升，吟唱声逐渐变小，年迈的老妪阖上她的独眼，朝未来瞥去。继之而来的是全然的寂静，丹妮听见远处的鸟儿啼叫，火炬嘶嘶噼啪，湖水轻柔拍打。多斯拉克人以漆黑如夜的眼睛看着她，等待预言。
Finally the crone opened her eye and lifted her arms. “I have seen his face, and heard the thunder of his hooves,” she proclaimed in a thin, wavery voice.
卓戈卡奥伸手握住丹妮臂膀，从手指的力道她感觉得出他的紧张。强如卓戈卡奥，在多希卡林透过烟尘占卜未来时也会感到恐惧。身后，她的女仆更是焦躁不安。
“The thunder of his hooves!” the others chorused.
最后老妪睁开独眼，举起双臂。“我看见了他的脸，听见他蹄声如雷。”她用尖细而颤抖的声音宣布。
“As swift as the wind he rides, and behind him his khalasar covers the earth, men without number, with arakhs shining in their hands like blades of razor grass. Fierce as a storm this prince will be. His enemies will tremble before him, and their wives will weep tears of blood and rend their flesh in grief. The bells in his hair will sing his coming, and the milk men in the stone tents will fear his name.” The old woman trembled and looked at Dany almost as if she were afraid. “The prince is riding, and he shall be the stallion who mounts the world.”
“他蹄声如雷！”几个老妪同声应道。
“The stallion who mounts the world!” the onlookers cried in echo, until the night rang to the sound of their voices.
“他的马迅疾如风，身后的卡拉萨覆盖整片大地，不可胜数，手中的亚拉克弯刀锋利如同芒草。王子将会如暴风般威猛，他的敌人会在他面前颤抖不休，敌人的妻子将悲伤泣血，哀恸欲绝。他发际的铃铛歌颂他的到来，居住在石头营帐的“奶人”惧怕他的名号。”老妇颤抖着望向丹妮，仿佛十分惧怕。“王子骑着马，他将成为骑着世界的骏马！”
The one-eyed crone peered at Dany. “What shall he be called, the stallion who mounts the world?”
“骑着世界的骏马！”，人们应声高呼，直到夜晚充溢他们的呼唤。
She stood to answer. “He shall be called Rhaego,” she said, using the words that Jhiqui had taught her. Her hands touched the swell beneath her breasts protectively as a roar went up from the Dothraki. “Rhaego,” they screamed. “Rhaego, Rhaego, Rhaego!”
独眼老妪睨向丹妮。“骑着世界的骏马要叫什么名字？”
The name was still ringing in her ears as Khal Drogo led her from the pit. His bloodriders fell in behind them. A procession followed them out onto the godsway, the broad grassy road that ran through the heart of Vaes Dothrak, from the horse gate to the Mother of Mountains. The crones of the dosh khaleen came first, with their eunuchs and slaves. Some supported themselves with tall carved staffs as they struggled along on ancient, shaking legs, while others walked as proud as any horselord. Each of the old women had been a khaleesi once. When their lord husbands died and a new khal took his place at the front of his riders, with a new khaleesi mounted beside him, they were sent here, to reign over the vast Dothraki nation. Even the mightiest of khals bowed to the wisdom and authority of the dosh khaleen . Still, it gave Dany the shivers to think that one day she might be sent to join them, whether she willed it or no.
她起身回答。“我们将叫他雷戈。”她说出姬琪事先教她的字。多斯拉克人群中顿时响起震耳欲聋的呐喊，她下意识地伸手护住胸部下方隆起的肚腹。“雷戈，”他们尖叫，“雷戈，雷戈，雷戈！”
Behind the wise women came the others; Khal Ogo and his son, the khalakka Fogo, Khal Jommo and his wives, the chief men of Drogo’s khalasar , Dany’s handmaids, the khal’s servants and slaves, and more. Bells rang and drums beat a stately cadence as they marched along the godsway. Stolen heroes and the gods of dead peoples brooded in the darkness beyond the road. Alongside the procession, slaves ran lightly through the grass with torches in their hands, and the flickering flames made the great monuments seem almost alive.
卓戈卡奥领她离开坑穴时，这名字还在她耳际回荡。他的血盟卫尾随在后。庞大的队伍走上众神大道。那是一条宽广嫩绿，贯穿维斯·多斯拉克心脏，从马门直到圣母山下的道路。队伍前列是多希卡林的老妪，以及侍候她们的太监与奴隶。她们有的拄着长长的雕花拐杖，挣扎摆动着老迈而颤抖的双脚；有的则犹如马王般昂首阔步。这些老妇人一度都是卡丽熙，当她们的丈夫过世，新的卡奥走上骑马战士的前列，而新的卡丽熙与他并肩共骑，她们便被送来这里，负责统理广大的多斯拉克国度。即便势力最大的卡奥，也得服膺多希卡林的智慧和威权。虽然如此，想到有朝一日不论自己情愿与否，都会被送来这里，成为她们一员，丹妮还是不禁打了个冷颤。
“What is meaning, name Rhaego?” Khal Drogo asked as they walked, using the Common Tongue of the Seven Kingdoms. She had been teaching him a few words when she could. Drogo was quick to learn when he put his mind to it, though his accent was so thick and barbarous that neither Ser Jorah nor Viserys could understand a word he said.
其他人跟随在女智者之后：奥戈卡奥和他的儿子佛戈卡拉喀，鸠摩卡奥和他的妻妾，卓戈卡拉萨的首脑成员，丹妮的侍女，卡奥的贴身奴仆，以及其他人。节奏庄严的铃铛鼓乐伴随他们走在众神大道上。从早已灭绝的种族手中盗来的英雄和神灵雕像默立于路旁的黑暗之中。奴隶轻快地跑在队伍两旁的草地上，手里擎着火把。摇曳的火焰照映下，雄伟的雕像好像有了生命。
“My brother Rhaegar was a fierce warrior, my sun-and-stars,” she told him. “He died before I was born. Ser Jorah says that he was the last of the dragons.”
“什么意思，名字雷戈？”卓戈卡奥边走边用七国的普通话问。平时他若有空，她便教他几个单字。卓戈一旦专心，学习速度很快，然而他的口音委实太重，十足野蛮人腔调，以致不论乔拉爵士还是韦赛里斯都听不懂。
Khal Drogo looked down at her. His face was a copper mask, yet under the long black mustache, drooping beneath the weight of its gold rings, she thought she glimpsed the shadow of a smile. “Is good name, Dan Ares wife, moon of my life,” he said.
“我的日和星，我哥哥雷加生前是个勇猛的战士，”她告诉他，“我还没出生他就战死了。乔拉爵士说他是真龙的最后传人。”
They rode to the lake the Dothraki called the Womb of the World, surrounded by a fringe of reeds, its water still and calm. A thousand thousand years ago, Jhiqui told her, the first man had emerged from its depths, riding upon the back of the first horse.
卓戈卡奥低头看她，脸庞如同赤铜面具，但在那被金环拉得低垂的长长黑胡须下，她却隐约瞥见了一抹微笑。“是好名字，丹瑞……里丝妻子，我生命的月亮。”他说。
The procession waited on the grassy shore as Dany stripped and let her soiled clothing fall to the ground. Naked, she stepped gingerly into the water. Irri said the lake had no bottom, but Dany felt soft mud squishing between her toes as she pushed through the tall reeds. The moon floated on the still black waters, shattering and re-forming as her ripples washed over it. Goose pimples rose on her pale skin as the coldness crept up her thighs and kissed her lower lips. The stallion’s blood had dried on her hands and around her mouth. Dany cupped her fingers and lifted the sacred waters over her head, cleansing herself and the child inside her while the khal and the others looked on. She heard the old women of the dosh khaleen muttering to each other as they watched, and wondered what they were saying.
他们骑马经过一座长满芦苇的静湖，湖面平坦如镜，多斯拉克人称其为“世界的子宫”。姬琪告诉她：几千万年以前，世界上第一个人便是从湖深处骑着世界上第一匹马出现的。
When she emerged from the lake, shivering and dripping, her handmaid Doreah hurried to her with a robe of painted sandsilk, but Khal Drogo waved her away. He was looking on her swollen breasts and the curve of her belly with approval, and Dany could see the shape of his manhood pressing through his horsehide trousers, below the heavy gold medallions of his belt. She went to him and helped him unlace. Then her huge khal took her by the hips and lifted her into the air, as he might lift a child. The bells in his hair rang softly.
队伍静候于绿草波荡的岸边，丹妮则脱去身上的脏衣服放在地上，赤身裸体，小心翼翼地探脚入水。伊丽说这湖深不见底，可丹妮一边拨开高大的芦苇，一边却感觉到脚趾间挤压的软泥。月亮漂浮在平静的黑水面，随着她激起的涟漪不断碎裂，又复聚合。寒意爬上她的大腿，亲吻她的下体，她白晰的肌肤上立时起了鸡皮疙瘩。手上和嘴边的马血早已干涸，她伸手捧起圣水，高举自头淋下，在卡奥和众目睽睽之下，涤净自己和体内的胎儿。她听见多希卡林的老妇低声私语，不禁好奇她们在说些什么。
Dany wrapped her arms around his shoulders and pressed her face against his neck as he thrust himself inside her. Three quick strokes and it was done. “The stallion who mounts the world,” Drogo whispered hoarsely. His hands still smelled of horse blood. He bit at her throat, hard, in the moment of his pleasure, and when he lifted her off, his seed filled her and trickled down the inside of her thighs. Only then was Doreah permitted to drape her in the scented sandsilk, and Irri to fit soft slippers to her feet.
待她浑身发抖，滴水淋漓自湖中归返，女仆多莉亚急忙拿起彩绘纱丝袍给她，却被卓戈卡奥挥手赶开。他面带称许地望着她肿胀的胸乳和腹部的浑圆曲线。丹妮看见那条厚重的金章腰带下，他的命根在马皮缝制的裤子里紧紧撑立。她上前为他解开裤带，魁梧的卡奥托住她的臀部，像抱小孩似地将她举到半空，发际的铃铛轻轻作响。
Khal Drogo laced himself up and spoke a command, and horses were brought to the lakeshore. Cohollo had the honor of helping the khaleesi onto her silver. Drogo spurred his stallion, and set off down the godsway beneath the moon and stars. On her silver, Dany easily kept pace.
丹妮伸手搂住他肩膀，将脸贴紧他的颈项。他插进她的体内，有了三下，一切便化为朦胧。“骑着世界的骏马。”卓戈沙哑地低语。他的手上仍有马血的味道。高潮来临的瞬间，他用力咬了她喉咙一口。等他把她抱开，他的体液充满她的体内，自大腿内侧缓缓流下。这时多莉亚才得以用洒过香水的纱丝袍裹住她，伊丽则为她穿上柔软的拖鞋。
The silk tenting that roofed Khal Drogo’s hall had been rolled up tonight, and the moon followed them inside. Flames leapt ten feet in the air from three huge stone-lined firepits. The air was thick with the smells of roasting meat and curdled, fermented mare’s milk. The hall was crowded and noisy when they entered, the cushions packed with those whose rank and name were not sufficient to allow them at the ceremony. As Dany rode beneath the arched entry and up the center aisle, every eye was on her. The Dothraki screamed out comments on her belly and her breasts, hailing the life within her. She could not understand all they shouted, but one phrase came clear. “The stallion that mounts the world,” she heard, bellowed in a thousand voices.
卓戈卡奥系好裤带，一声令下，立即有人将马牵来湖边。科霍罗扶卡丽熙骑上银马，卓戈一踢马刺，在月亮和星辰照耀下朝众神大道急驰而去。丹妮驱策银马，从容不迫地跟上。
The sounds of drums and horns swirled up into the night. Half-clothed women spun and danced on the low tables, amid joints of meat and platters piled high with plums and dates and pomegranates. Many of the men were drunk on clotted mare’s milk, yet Dany knew no arakhs would clash tonight, not here in the sacred city, where blades and bloodshed were forbidden.
卓戈卡奥宫殿顶端的丝织帷幕，今晚已被卷起，月光追随着他们进入室内。三个石砌火盆里，烈焰高高腾跃，离地十尺。空气中充满烤肉和发酵的凝固马奶味道。他们进门时大厅中已是人声鼎沸，摩肩擦踵。靠垫上坐满了地位较低，没有资格参加仪式的人。丹妮骑马穿过拱门，走上中间凸起的走道，众人的目光都集中在她身上。多斯拉克人对她的肚子和胸乳大发议论，为她体内的小生命喝采。她无法完全听懂他们说的内容，但有一句清晰无比：“骑着世界的骏马”，几千个人异口同声地呼喝。
Khal Drogo dismounted and took his place on the high bench. Khal Jommo and Khal Ogo, who had been in Vaes Dothrak with their khalasars when they arrived, were given seats of high honor to Drogo’s right and left. The bloodriders of the three khals sat below them, and farther down Khal Jommo’s four wives.
鼓声和号角响彻夜空，低矮的桌上摆满菜肴，盘中的李子、蜜枣和石榴堆得老高，还有大块大块的肉，衣着暴露的女人灵动舞跃、穿梭其间。许多人早已被马奶酒灌得烂醉如泥，然而丹妮知道今晚决不会有流血冲突，因为在圣城里，不论刀械或打斗都被绝对禁止。
Dany climbed off her silver and gave the reins to one of the slaves. As Doreah and Irri arranged her cushions, she searched for her brother. Even across the length of the crowded hall, Viserys should have been conspicuous with his pale skin, silvery hair, and beggar’s rags, but she did not see him anywhere.
卓戈卡奥下马，坐上高处的凳子。他们抵达维斯·多斯拉克期间，鸠摩卡奥和奥戈卡奥与其卡拉萨也在城内，因此两人被安排在卓戈左右两侧的荣誉位置。三位卡奥的血盟卫坐在他们下方，再下面坐了鸠摩卡奥的四个太太。
Her glance roamed the crowded tables near the walls, where men whose braids were even shorter than their manhoods sat on frayed rugs and flat cushions around the low tables, but all the faces she saw had black eyes and copper skin. She spied Ser Jorah Mormont near the center of the hall, close to the middle firepit. It was a place of respect, if not high honor; the Dothraki esteemed the knight’s prowess with a sword. Dany sent Jhiqui to bring him to her table. Mormont came at once, and went to one knee before her. “Khaleesi,” he said, “I am yours to command.”
丹妮莉丝爬下银马，将缰绳交给一名奴隶。趁着多莉亚和伊丽为她摆放靠垫的空当，她在人群中搜寻哥哥的踪影。即便在人潮拥挤的大厅，白肤、银发，一身破烂的韦赛里斯也很好辨认，可今天她却遍寻不着。
She patted the stuffed horsehide cushion beside her. “Sit and talk with me.”
她的目光扫过墙边挤满人的餐桌，那些辫子比命根还短的人便是坐在破烂而平板的椅垫上，围绕着低矮的桌子。可她及目所见的每一张脸孔，都是黑眼睛古铜色皮肤。大厅中央，在中间的火盆边，她瞥见了乔拉·莫尔蒙爵士。那个位置虽然算不上地位崇高，但起码受人尊敬。多斯拉克人很敬重骑士的使剑本领。丹妮派姬琪去把他带到自己的桌边。莫尔蒙立刻前来，在她面前单膝跪下。“卡丽熙，”他说，“我听候您差遣。”
“You honor me.” The knight seated himself cross-legged on the cushion. A slave knelt before him, offering a wooden platter full of ripe figs. Ser Jorah took one and bit it in half.
她拍拍身边填满马皮的靠垫。“坐下来跟我聊聊。”
“Where is my brother?” Dany asked. “He ought to have come by now, for the feast.”
“这是我莫大的荣幸。”骑士盘腿坐上椅垫。一名奴隶到他面前跪下，呈上一个装满成熟无花果的木盘。乔拉爵士拣了一个，咬成两半。
“I saw His Grace this morning,” he told her. “He told me he was going to the Western Market, in search of wine.”
“我哥哥上哪儿去了？”丹妮问，“他应该在这里，他应该来参加宴会。”
“Wine?” Dany said doubtfully. Viserys could not abide the taste of the fermented mare’s milk the Dothraki drank, she knew that, and he was oft at the bazaars these days, drinking with the traders who came in the great caravans from east and west. He seemed to find their company more congenial than hers.
“今天早上我见过陛下，”他告诉她，“他说要去城西市集找葡萄酒。”
“Wine,” Ser Jorah confirmed, “and he has some thought to recruit men for his army from the sellswords who guard the caravans.” A serving girl laid a blood pie in front of him, and he attacked it with both hands.
“葡萄酒？”丹妮满腹怀疑地说。韦赛里斯受不了多斯拉克人惯饮的发酵马奶，这她明白，因此他时常光顾市集买酒喝。最近他更是常和东西两边来的商队混在一起，他似乎宁可与他们为伍，也不愿和她作伴。
“Is that wise?” she asked. “He has no gold to pay soldiers. What if he’s betrayed?” Caravan guards were seldom troubled much by thoughts of honor, and the Usurper in King’s Landing would pay well for her brother’s head. “You ought to have gone with him, to keep him safe. You are his sworn sword.”
“没错，”乔拉爵士证实，“他有意从商队守卫里雇些佣兵作为自己的侍卫。”一名女侍在他面前放上一张血馅饼，他双手并用大吃起来。
“We are in Vaes Dothrak,” he reminded her. “No one may carry a blade here or shed a man’s blood.”
“这样做好吗？”她问，“他没有钱支付薪水，万一有人出卖他怎么办？”商队守卫向来不在乎荣誉，而远在君临的篡夺者又一定会出重金悬赏哥哥的项上人头。“你应该跟去保护他才对。你是他的誓言骑士。”
“Yet men die,” she said. “Jhogo told me. Some of the traders have eunuchs with them, huge men who strangle thieves with wisps of silk. That way no blood is shed and the gods are not angered.”
我们身处维斯·多斯拉克，”他提醒她，“这里不许任何人携带武器，也决不允许任何流血事件。”
“Then let us hope your brother will be wise enough not to steal anything.” Ser Jorah wiped the grease off his mouth with the back of his hand and leaned close over the table. “He had planned to take your dragon’s eggs, until I warned him that I’d cut off his hand if he so much as touched them.”
“但依然有人丧命，”她说，“姬琪跟我说，有些商人雇了身强体壮的太监，专门负责用绸带勒死小偷。这样杀人不沾血，便不会激怒天上众神。”
For a moment Dany was so shocked she had no words. “My eggs … but they’re mine , Magister Illyrio gave them to me, a bride gift, why would Viserys want … they’re only stones …”
“那就祈祷您哥哥有足够的智慧，别顺手牵羊吧。”乔拉爵士用手背抹去嘴角油脂，凑近桌子，“他本来想偷您的龙蛋，可我警告过他：若是敢碰一下，我就砍掉他的手。”
“The same could be said of rubies and diamonds and fire opals, Princess … and dragon’s eggs are rarer by far. Those traders he’s been drinking with would sell their own manhoods for even one of those stones , and with all three Viserys could buy as many sellswords as he might need.”
有好一会儿丹妮震惊得说不出话。“我的蛋……可那是我的东西，是伊利里欧总督送给我的结婚礼物，韦赛里斯为什么要……不过是几颗石头罢了……”
Dany had not known, had not even suspected. “Then … he should have them. He does not need to steal them. He had only to ask. He is my brother … and my true king.”
“公主殿下，照您这么说，红宝石、钻石和火蛋白石也不过是石头……而龙蛋不用说希罕得多。为了这几颗石头，跟他喝酒那些商人连命根子都可以不要，有了三颗龙蛋，韦赛里斯雇多少佣兵都不成问题。”
“He is your brother,” Ser Jorah acknowledged.
丹妮莉丝没想到这层，她根本没想过。“那……这些蛋应该给他才是。他不需要偷，只要跟我说就行了啊。他是我的哥哥……也是我真正的国王。”
“You do not understand, ser,” she said. “My mother died giving me birth, and my father and my brother Rhaegar even before that. I would never have known so much as their names if Viserys had not been there to tell me. He was the only one left. The only one. He is all I have.”
“他是你的哥哥。”乔拉爵士同意。
“Once,” said Ser Jorah. “No longer, Khaleesi . You belong to the Dothraki now. In your womb rides the stallion who mounts the world.” He held out his cup, and a slave filled it with fermented mare’s milk, sour-smelling and thick with clots.
“爵士先生，您不了解，”她说，“家母生我的时候难产而死，家父和家兄雷加死得更早。若不是有韦赛里斯，我连他们的名字都不知道。现在家里就只剩下他，他是硕果仅存的一个。他是我惟一的亲人。”
Dany waved her away. Even the smell of it made her feel ill, and she would take no chances of bringing up the horse heart she had forced herself to eat. “What does it mean?” she asked. “What is this stallion? Everyone was shouting it at me, but I don’t understand.”
“那是过去的事，”乔拉爵士道，“如今不一样，卡丽熙。如今您属于多斯拉克人，您肚子里怀的是骑着世界的骏马。”他举起酒杯，奴隶便为他斟满酸味扑鼻，结成块状的发酵马奶。
“The stallion is the khal of khals promised in ancient prophecy, child. He will unite the Dothraki into a single khalasar and ride to the ends of the earth, or so it was promised. All the people of the world will be his herd.”
丹妮挥她走开。她光闻到这气味就不舒服，况且她可不想连带把刚才勉强吞下的马肉一古脑吐出来。“那是什么意思？”她问，“这匹骏马代表什么？每个人都对我喊这个名字，但我却不懂。”
“Oh,” Dany said in a small voice. Her hand smoothed her robe down over the swell of her stomach. “I named him Rhaego.”
“孩子，这匹骏马是远古预言中许诺的君王，卡奥中的卡奥。他将统一多斯拉克民族，组成一个庞大的卡拉萨，版图远及世界尽头，世上所有人类都会归他统领，预言中是这么说的。”
“A name to make the Usurper’s blood run cold.”
“噢，”丹妮小声说。她伸手抚平肚子上的长袍。“我给他取名雷戈。”
Suddenly Doreah was tugging at her elbow. “My lady,” the handmaid whispered urgently, “your brother …”
“这名字会教篡夺者浑身发冷。”
Dany looked down the length of the long, roofless hall and there he was, striding toward her. From the lurch in his step, she could tell at once that Viserys had found his wine … and something that passed for courage.
突然多莉亚扯着她的手肘。“卡丽熙，”女仆焦急地耳语，“您哥哥他……”
He was wearing his scarlet silks, soiled and travel-stained. His cloak and gloves were black velvet, faded from the sun. His boots were dry and cracked, his silver-blond hair matted and tangled. A longsword swung from his belt in a leather scabbard. The Dothraki eyed the sword as he passed; Dany heard curses and threats and angry muttering rising all around her, like a tide. The music died away in a nervous stammering of drums.
丹妮放眼朝无顶的长厅彼端望去，果然看见他大跨步朝她走来。从那踉跄的脚步看来，她立时明白韦赛里斯已经找到了他的葡萄酒……以及某种勉强可算是勇气的东西。
A sense of dread closed around her heart. “Go to him,” she commanded Ser Jorah. “Stop him. Bring him here. Tell him he can have the dragon’s eggs if that is what he wants.” The knight rose swiftly to his feet.
他穿着鲜红丝衣，上面沾满汗渍和尘土，他的披风和手套本为黑色天鹅绒，如今也因日晒而褪色。他的靴子干裂，银发纠结散乱，腰间斜挂着一柄皮套长剑。他走进来时，多斯拉克人纷纷盯着他的剑，丹妮听见咒骂，威胁和愤怒的话语如涨潮般从四周升起。鼓声凌乱，音乐也渐渐停了下来。
“Where is my sister?” Viserys shouted, his voice thick with wine. “I’ve come for her feast. How dare you presume to eat without me? No one eats before the king. Where is she? The whore can’t hide from the dragon.”
她的心中充满恐惧。“快去，”她命令乔拉爵士。“叫住他，带他过来。告诉他如果他想要龙蛋，我就给他。”骑士敏捷地起身。
He stopped beside the largest of the three firepits, peering around at the faces of the Dothraki. There were five thousand men in the hall, but only a handful who knew the Common Tongue. Yet even if his words were incomprehensible, you had only to look at him to know that he was drunk.
“我家老妹在哪儿啊？”韦赛里斯酒气冲天地喊，“老子来参加她的喜宴啦。你们好大胆子，竟然没等老子就先开动？没有人敢比国王先开动。她在哪儿啊？小贱货躲不了真龙啦。”
Ser Jorah went to him swiftly, whispered something in his ear, and took him by the arm, but Viserys wrenched free. “Keep your hands off me! No one touches the dragon without leave.”
他在最大的火盆边停下脚步，环顾四周一张张多斯拉克人的脸。大厅里有五千人，但通晓通用语的没几个。即便如此，只消看上一眼，任谁都知道他烂醉如泥。
Dany glanced anxiously up at the high bench. Khal Drogo was saying something to the other khals beside him. Khal Jommo grinned, and Khal Ogo began to guffaw loudly.
乔拉爵士快步走到他身旁，在他耳边悄悄说了几句，然后伸手去扶他。韦赛里斯猛力挣脱。“把你的手拿开！不经允许，谁也不准触碰真龙。”
The sound of laughter made Viserys lift his eyes. “Khal Drogo,” he said thickly, his voice almost polite. “I’m here for the feast.” He staggered away from Ser Jorah, making to join the three khals on the high bench.
丹妮不安地瞄了高位一眼。卓戈卡奥正对两旁的卡奥说着什么，鸠摩卡奥听了嘻嘻一乐，奥戈卡奥则是扯开嗓门哈哈大笑。
Khal Drogo rose, spat out a dozen words in Dothraki, faster than Dany could understand, and pointed. “Khal Drogo says your place is not on the high bench,” Ser Jorah translated for her brother. “Khal Drogo says your place is there.”
笑声引得韦赛里斯抬眼。“卓戈卡奥，”他粗声道，那口吻总算还有礼貌。“我是来参加晚宴的。”他蹒跚着离开乔拉爵士，准备到高位上与三位卡奥同坐。
Viserys glanced where the khal was pointing. At the back of the long hall, in a corner by the wall, deep in shadow so better men would not need to look on them, sat the lowest of the low; raw unblooded boys, old men with clouded eyes and stiff joints, the dim-witted and the maimed. Far from the meat, and farther from honor. “That is no place for a king,” her brother declared.
卓戈卡奥站起来，吐出一串多斯拉克话，快得丹妮听不清楚，然后他指了指。“卓戈卡奥说你的座位不在上面，”乔拉爵士翻译给哥哥听，“卡奥说你的座位在那里。”
“Is place,” Khal Drogo answered, in the Common Tongue that Dany had taught him, “for Sorefoot King.” He clapped his hands together. “A cart! Bring cart for Khal Rhaggat!”
韦赛里斯瞟了一眼卡奥所指的地方。那是大厅尽头的阴暗角落，好让别人眼不见为净，坐在那里的人地位低得不能再低：从未见血的小男孩，筋骨僵硬、两眼生翳的老人，以及智障和残废。他们远离菜肴，更远离荣耀。“那不是给国王坐的地方。”哥哥高声宣告。
Five thousand Dothraki began to laugh and shout. Ser Jorah was standing beside Viserys, screaming in his ear, but the roar in the hall was so thunderous that Dany could not hear what he was saying. Her brother shouted back and the two men grappled, until Mormont knocked Viserys bodily to the floor.
“是，”卓戈卡奥用丹妮教他的通用语回答，“给酸腿国王设座。”他猛一击掌。“来人！弄辆马车给拉迦特卡奥坐！”
Her brother drew his sword.
五千名多斯拉克人齐声大笑。乔拉爵士站在韦赛里斯身边，扯开喉咙朝他耳朵大吼，可是大厅里的喊叫震耳欲聋，因此丹妮听不见他说些什么。韦赛里斯吼回去，接着两人扭打成一团，直到莫尔蒙把韦赛里斯整个打倒在地。
The bared steel shone a fearful red in the glare from the firepits. “Keep away from me!” Viserys hissed. Ser Jorah backed off a step, and her brother climbed unsteadily to his feet. He waved the sword over his head, the borrowed blade that Magister Illyrio had given him to make him seem more kingly. Dothraki were shrieking at him from all sides, screaming vile curses.
哥哥拔出了剑。
Dany gave a wordless cry of terror. She knew what a drawn sword meant here, even if her brother did not.
在火光照耀下，剑刃闪着一道令人畏惧的红光。“滚远点！”韦赛里斯嘶声道。乔拉爵士向后退开，哥哥踉跄地爬起来，持剑在头上挥舞。那把剑是伊利里欧总督为了让他有个国王的样子，特别借给他的。四面八方的多斯拉克人都在朝他嘶吼，尖叫着恶毒的诅咒。
Her voice made Viserys turn his head, and he saw her for the first time. “There she is,” he said, smiling. He stalked toward her, slashing at the air as if to cut a path through a wall of enemies, though no one tried to bar his way.
丹妮发出一声无言的惊叫。哥哥或许不知在这里拔剑会有何后果，但她太清楚了。
“The blade … you must not,” she begged him. “Please, Viserys. It is forbidden. Put down the sword and come share my cushions. There’s drink, food … is it the dragon’s eggs you want? You can have them, only throw away the sword.”
听到她的声音，韦赛里斯转过头，这才终于看见她。“原来她在这儿。”他微笑着说。他朝她步步进逼，胡乱挥舞宝剑，仿佛要在乱军中杀出重围，然而无人阻挡他的来路。
“Do as she tells you, fool,” Ser Jorah shouted, “before you get us all killed.”
“你的剑……你真的不可以这样，”她哀求他，“求求你，韦赛里斯。这是被禁止的。把剑收起来，跟我一起坐吧。这里吃的喝的都有……你想要龙蛋吗？我可以给你，但请你先把剑扔下。”
Viserys laughed. “They can’t kill us. They can’t shed blood here in the sacred city … but I can.” He laid the point of his sword between Daenerys’s breasts and slid it downward, over the curve of her belly. “I want what I came for,” he told her. “I want the crown he promised me. He bought you, but he never paid for you. Tell him I want what I bargained for, or I’m taking you back. You and the eggs both. He can keep his bloody foal. I’ll cut the bastard out and leave it for him.” The sword point pushed through her silks and pricked at her navel. Viserys was weeping, she saw; weeping and laughing, both at the same time, this man who had once been her brother.
“笨蛋，快照她的话做，”乔拉爵士吼道，“不然你会把我们通通害死。”
Distantly, as from far away, Dany heard her handmaid Jhiqui sobbing in fear, pleading that she dared not translate, that the khal would bind her and drag her behind his horse all the way up the Mother of Mountains. She put her arm around the girl. “Don’t be afraid,” she said. “I shall tell him.”
韦赛里斯朗声大笑。“他们奈何不了我们。他们不能在圣城里流血……但我能。”他将剑尖指着丹妮莉丝双乳之间，缓缓下滑，顺着隆起肚腹的曲线。“我只要属于我的东西，”他告诉她，“我只要他答应我的那顶王冠。他买了你，却没有付钱。叫他遵守约定，否则我就要收回你和龙蛋。他可以留下他的种，我会把那野种割下来给他。”剑尖刺穿丝衣，轻戳她的肚脐。她发现韦赛里斯正在啜泣，眼前这个曾是她哥哥的人，此刻又哭又笑。
She did not know if she had enough words, yet when she was done Khal Drogo spoke a few brusque sentences in Dothraki, and she knew he understood. The sun of her life stepped down from the high bench. “What did he say?” the man who had been her brother asked her, flinching.
似乎是很遥远的地方，女仆姬琪也在惧怕地啜泣，哭着说她不敢翻译，因为卡奥会把她绑在坐骑后一路拖上圣母山。她伸手抱住女孩。“别怕，”她说，“让我来告诉他。”
It had grown so silent in the hall that she could hear the bells in Khal Drogo’s hair, chiming softly with each step he took. His bloodriders followed him, like three copper shadows. Daenerys had gone cold all over. “He says you shall have a splendid golden crown that men shall tremble to behold.”
她不知自己了解的词汇是否足够，但当她讲完，卓戈卡奥用多斯拉克话说了几个粗鲁的句子，她便知道他是听懂了。她生命中的太阳从高位上走下来。“他说什么？”那曾是她哥哥的人皱眉问。
Viserys smiled and lowered his sword. That was the saddest thing, the thing that tore at her afterward … the way he smiled. “That was all I wanted,” he said. “What was promised.”
大厅一片寂然，只听卓戈卡奥发际的铃铛随着脚步轻声作响。他的血盟卫尾随在后，仿如三个古铜色的影子。丹妮莉丝浑身发冷。“他说你将会拥有一顶精美绝伦，任谁看了都会颤抖的黄金王冠。”
When the sun of her life reached her, Dany slid an arm around his waist. The khal said a word, and his bloodriders leapt forward. Qotho seized the man who had been her brother by the arms. Haggo shattered his wrist with a single, sharp twist of his huge hands. Cohollo pulled the sword from his limp fingers. Even now Viserys did not understand. “No,” he shouted, “you cannot touch me, I am the dragon, the dragon , and I will be crowned!”
韦赛里斯微笑着放下剑。将来最教她伤心，最让她撕心裂肺的一件事……就是他微笑的模样。“我要的就只是这个，”他说，“他答应要给我的。”
Khal Drogo unfastened his belt. The medallions were pure gold, massive and ornate, each one as large as a man’s hand. He shouted a command. Cook slaves pulled a heavy iron stew pot from the firepit, dumped the stew onto the ground, and returned the pot to the flames. Drogo tossed in the belt and watched without expression as the medallions turned red and began to lose their shape. She could see fires dancing in the onyx of his eyes. A slave handed him a pair of thick horsehair mittens, and he pulled them on, never so much as looking at the man.
当她生命中的太阳走到她身边时，丹妮伸手搂住他的腰。卡奥说了一个字，他的血盟卫立即飞扑上前。柯索抓住那个曾是她哥哥的人的双手，哈戈巨掌一拧，利落地折断了他的手腕。科霍罗从他垂软无力的手中夺下剑来。即便到了此时，韦赛里斯依旧不明白。“不行，”他叫道，“你们不准碰我，我是真龙，真龙，我要我的王冠！”
Viserys began to scream the high, wordless scream of the coward facing death. He kicked and twisted, whimpered like a dog and wept like a child, but the Dothraki held him tight between them. Ser Jorah had made his way to Dany’s side. He put a hand on her shoulder. “Turn away, my princess, I beg you.”
卓戈卡奥解开腰带。带子完全由雕饰华丽的纯金勋章构成，每个勋章都大如男人手掌。他吼出一个命令，负责烹饪的奴隶立刻从火炉上拉出一个沉重的铁锅，将里面的热汤倒在地上，再将锅子放回炉里。卓戈把腰带抛进锅中，面无表情地看着奖章烧得通红，渐渐失去原有的形状。在他黑如玛瑙的眼瞳里，她见到跃动的火苗。一个奴隶递上一双厚实的马毛手套，他静静地戴上，看都没看那人一眼。
“No.” She folded her arms across the swell of her belly, protectively.
韦赛里斯这时才像个即将面对死亡的懦夫一般，开始了高亢的无言惨叫。他又踢又扭，像狗一样呜咽，像小孩似地啼哭，但几个多斯拉克人牢牢地把他抓住。乔拉爵士走到丹妮身边，伸手按住她的肩膀。“公主殿下，请您转过头，我求求您。”
At the last, Viserys looked at her. “Sister, please … Dany, tell them … make them … sweet sister …”
“不。”她双手抱住隆起的肚腹，下意识地保护受威胁的孩子。
When the gold was half-melted and starting to run, Drogo reached into the flames, snatched out the pot. “Crown!” he roared. “Here. A crown for Cart King!” And upended the pot over the head of the man who had been her brother.
最后，韦赛里斯望向她。“妹妹，请你……丹妮，告诉他们……让他们……好妹妹……”
The sound Viserys Targaryen made when that hideous iron helmet covered his face was like nothing human. His feet hammered a frantic beat against the dirt floor, slowed, stopped. Thick globs of molten gold dripped down onto his chest, setting the scarlet silk to smoldering … yet no drop of blood was spilled.
当黄金融化了一半，正开始沸腾时，卓戈伸手到烈焰中抓起锅子。“王冠！”他咆哮道，“来，给马车国王戴的王冠！”说完便朝那个曾是她哥哥的人当头浇下。
He was no dragon , Dany thought, curiously calm. Fire cannot kill a dragon .
那顶狰狞的铁盔遮盖住韦赛里斯·坦格利安的脸庞时，他所发出的声音，只能以惨绝人寰来形容。他的双脚在泥地上狂乱地蹬了几下，渐缓，终止。半液态的金块滴落他的胸膛，鲜红的丝衣嘶嘶冒烟……但他没有流出一滴血。
*EDDARD
他不是真龙，丹妮暗想，思绪意外地平静，真龙不怕火。
H e was walking through the crypts beneath Winterfell, as he had walked a thousand times before. The Kings of Winter watched him pass with eyes of ice, and the direwolves at their feet turned their great stone heads and snarled. Last of all, he came to the tomb where his father slept, with Brandon and Lyanna beside him. “Promise me, Ned,” Lyanna’s statue whispered. She wore a garland of pale blue roses, and her eyes wept blood.
第四十八章 艾德
Eddard Stark jerked upright, his heart racing, the blankets tangled around him. The room was black as pitch, and someone was hammering on the door. “Lord Eddard,” a voice called loudly.
他穿过临冬城底的墓窖，如同之前几千次一样。凛冬国度的王者用冰冷的眼光看着他经过，脚边的冰原狼扭过石砌的狼头向他嘶吼。最后，他来到父亲长眠之处，在他身旁是布兰登和莱安娜。“奈德，答应我。”莱安娜的雕像轻声说。她头戴碧蓝玫瑰织成的花环，双眼泣血。
“A moment.” Groggy and naked, he stumbled his way across the darkened chamber. When he opened the door, he found Tomard with an upraised fist, and Cayn with a taper in hand. Between them stood the king’s own steward.
艾德·史塔克惊坐而起，心脏狂跳，毛毯纠结。房间漆黑一片，敲门声大作。“艾德大人。”有人高叫。
The man’s face might have been carved of stone, so little did it show. “My lord Hand,” he intoned. “His Grace the King commands your presence. At once.”
“等一等。”他身子虚弱，躯体赤裸，跌跌撞撞穿过黑暗的房间。打开门，他看到正举拳敲门的托马德，以及手握烛台的凯恩。两人之间是国王的御前总管。
So Robert had returned from his hunt. It was long past time. “I shall need a few moments to dress.” Ned left the man waiting without. Cayn helped him with his clothes; white linen tunic and grey cloak, trousers cut open down his plaster-sheathed leg, his badge of office, and last of all a belt of heavy silver links. He sheathed the Valyrian dagger at his waist.
那人面无表情，几乎像是石雕。“首相大人，”他语气平板地说，“国王陛下宣您立刻觐见。”
The Red Keep was dark and still as Cayn and Tomard escorted him across the inner bailey. The moon hung low over the walls, ripening toward full. On the ramparts, a guardsman in a gold cloak walked his rounds.
这么说劳勃已经打猎归来，也早该是时候了。“给我几分钟换衣服。”奈德让总管等在门外。凯恩服侍他更衣，他穿上白色亚麻布外衣和灰色披风，裤子已经裁短，方便打上石膏的断腿。他扣上首相徽章，以及一条沉重的银链腰带，最后将那把瓦雷利亚匕首系在腰间。
The royal apartments were in Maegor’s Holdfast, a massive square fortress that nestled in the heart of the Red Keep behind walls twelve feet thick and a dry moat lined with iron spikes, a castle-within-a-castle. Ser Boros Blount guarded the far end of the bridge, white steel armor ghostly in the moonlight. Within, Ned passed two other knights of the Kingsguard; Ser Preston Greenfield stood at the bottom of the steps, and Ser Barristan Selmy waited at the door of the king’s bedchamber. Three men in white cloaks , he thought, remembering, and a strange chill went through him. Ser Barristan’s face was as pale as his armor. Ned had only to look at him to know that something was dreadfully wrong. The royal steward opened the door. “Lord Eddard Stark, the Hand of the King,” he announced.
红堡黑暗而寂静。当凯恩和托马德护送他穿过内城时，由缺转圆的月亮已经低悬高墙。壁垒上，一名金色披风的守卫正来回巡视。
“Bring him here,” Robert’s voice called, strangely thick.
王家居室位于梅葛楼，那是一座巨大的方形要塞，深藏在红堡的中心地带，由十二尺厚的围墙以及干涸但插满尖刺的护城河团团包围。这是座城中之城。柏洛斯·布劳恩爵士把守在吊桥彼端，白色精钢铠甲在月光下寒气森森。进楼之后，奈德又经过两名御林铁卫，普列斯顿·格林菲尔爵士站在楼梯口，巴利斯坦。赛尔弥爵士守在国王寝室门外。三个雪白披风的骑士，他忆起过去，一阵诡异的寒意袭上心头。巴利斯坦爵士的脸和他的盔甲一样苍白。奈德只需看他一眼，便知大事不妙。王家总管打开门，“艾德·史塔克公爵大人，国王之手。”他高声宣布。
Fires blazed in the twin hearths at either end of the bedchamber, filling the room with a sullen red glare. The heat within was suffocating. Robert lay across the canopied bed. At the bedside hovered Grand Maester Pycelle, while Lord Renly paced restlessly before the shuttered windows. Servants moved back and forth, feeding logs to the fire and boiling wine. Cersei Lannister sat on the edge of the bed beside her husband. Her hair was tousled, as if from sleep, but there was nothing sleepy in her eyes. They followed Ned as Tomard and Cayn helped him cross the room. He seemed to move very slowly, as if he were still dreaming.
“带他进来。”劳勃喊道，声音出奇地混浊。
The king still wore his boots. Ned could see dried mud and blades of grass clinging to the leather where Robert’s feet stuck out beneath the blanket that covered him. A green doublet lay on the floor, slashed open and discarded, the cloth crusted with red-brown stains. The room smelled of smoke and blood and death.
卧室两端对称位置的壁炉里火烧得炽热，让房间充满一种阴沉的红色亮光。屋内的热度高得令人窒息，劳勃躺在挂着幔帐的床上，派席尔国师随侍在旁，蓝礼公爵则焦躁地在紧闭的窗前踱步。仆人来来去去，或增添柴火，或煮热葡萄酒。瑟曦·兰尼斯特坐在床边，靠近她的丈夫。她头发散乱，似乎刚从睡梦中醒来，但那双眼中却毫无睡意。托马德和凯恩扶着奈德穿过房间时，那双眼睛便直直地盯着他看。他移动的速度非常缓慢，仿佛置身梦境。
“Ned,” the king whispered when he saw him. His face was pale as milk. “Come … closer.”
劳勃双脚伸在毛毯外，还套着靴子，奈德看见皮革上沾满泥土和干草。一件绿色外衣扔在地上，上面有割开后弃置的痕迹，以及褐红的污垢。房间弥漫着烟尘与血腥，还有死亡的气息。
His men brought him close. Ned steadied himself with a hand on the bedpost. He had only to look down at Robert to know how bad it was. “What …?” he began, his throat clenched.
“奈德，”国王看见他的脸，便小声说。他的脸色苍白一如牛奶。“靠……近一点。”
“A boar.” Lord Renly was still in his hunting greens, his cloak spattered with blood.
奈德的侍卫扶他上前。他一手撑着床柱，稳住身子。他只需低头看劳勃一眼，便知伤势有多严重。“是什么……？”他开口欲问，喉咙却仿佛被钳子夹住。
“A devil,” the king husked. “My own fault. Too much wine, damn me to hell. Missed my thrust.”
“是一只野猪。”蓝礼公爵仍穿着绿色猎装，斗篷上全是血。
“And where were the rest of you?” Ned demanded of Lord Renly. “Where was Ser Barristan and the Kingsguard?”
“一头该死的恶魔。”国王嘶声道，“我自己失误。酒喝多了，结果没射中，我活该下地狱。”
Renly’s mouth twitched. “My brother commanded us to stand aside and let him take the boar alone.”
“你们都在干什么？”奈德质问蓝礼公爵，“巴利斯坦爵士和御林铁卫都跑哪儿去了？”
Eddard Stark lifted the blanket.
蓝礼撇撇嘴。“我哥哥他命令我们站一边儿去，好让他单独对付那只野猪。”
They had done what they could to close him up, but it was nowhere near enough. The boar must have been a fearsome thing. It had ripped the king from groin to nipple with its tusks. The wine-soaked bandages that Grand Maester Pycelle had applied were already black with blood, and the smell off the wound was hideous. Ned’s stomach turned. He let the blanket fall.
艾德·史塔克揭开毛毯。
“Stinks,” Robert said. “The stink of death, don’t think I can’t smell it. Bastard did me good, eh? But I … I paid him back in kind, Ned.” The king’s smile was as terrible as his wound, his teeth red. “Drove a knife right through his eye. Ask them if I didn’t. Ask them.”
他们已经竭尽所能为他缝合，但效果依旧不明显。那野猪一定是头可怕的家伙，它用两根长牙把国王从下体一直撕裂到胸部。派席尔国师用来包扎的浸酒纱布已经染满鲜血，散发的气味更是骇人。奈德的胃一阵翻搅。他松开毛毯。
“Truly,” Lord Renly murmured. “We brought the carcass back with us, at my brother’s command.”
“臭死了，”劳勃道，“这就是死亡的臭气，别以为我闻不出来。这回我可被整惨了，对吧？不过我……我也没让它好过，奈德。”国王的笑容与伤口同样惊人，他的牙齿一片血红。“我一刀捅烂了它眼睛。你问问他们是不是真的……问哪！”
“For the feast,” Robert whispered. “Now leave us. The lot of you. I need to speak with Ned.”
“是的，”蓝礼公爵喃喃道，“照我哥哥的吩咐，我们把尸体带了回来。”
“Robert, my sweet lord …” Cersei began.
“带回来准备晚宴。”劳勃轻声说，“让我们独处一下。你们都退下，我要跟奈德谈谈。”
“I said leave,” Robert insisted with a hint of his old fierceness. “What part of that don’t you understand, woman?”
“劳勃，亲爱的……”瑟曦开口。
Cersei gathered up her skirts and her dignity and led the way to the door. Lord Renly and the others followed. Grand Maester Pycelle lingered, his hands shaking as he offered the king a cup of thick white liquid. “The milk of the poppy, Your Grace,” he said. “Drink. For your pain.”
“我说过了，给我退下。”劳勃的坚持里有几分他昔日的刚毅。“你是哪个字听不懂啊，臭女人？”
Robert knocked the cup away with the back of his hand. “Away with you. I’ll sleep soon enough, old fool. Get out.”
瑟曦拢起她的裙子和自尊，领头走向房门。蓝礼公爵和其他人跟在后面。派席尔大学士留了下来，双手颤抖着把一杯浓浊的白色液体递给国王。“陛下，这是罂粟花奶，”他说，“请喝下去，给您止痛。”
Grand Maester Pycelle gave Ned a stricken look as he shuffled from the room.
劳勃用手背挥开杯子。“快滚，老不死，我再过不久就要一睡不醒了。滚出去。”
“Damn you, Robert,” Ned said when they were alone. His leg was throbbing so badly he was almost blind with pain. Or perhaps it was grief that fogged his eyes. He lowered himself to the bed, beside his friend. “Why do you always have to be so headstrong?”
派席尔国师给了奈德一个受伤的眼神，拖着脚离开了。
“Ah, fuck you, Ned,” the king said hoarsely. “I killed the bastard, didn’t I?” A lock of matted black hair fell across his eyes as he glared up at Ned. “Ought to do the same for you. Can’t leave a man to hunt in peace. Ser Robar found me. Gregor’s head. Ugly thought. Never told the Hound. Let Cersei surprise him.” His laugh turned into a grunt as a spasm of pain hit him. “Gods have mercy,” he muttered, swallowing his agony. “The girl. Daenerys. Only a child, you were right … that’s why, the girl … the gods sent the boar … sent to punish me …” The king coughed, bringing up blood. “Wrong, it was wrong, I … only a girl … Varys, Littlefinger, even my brother … worthless … no one to tell me no but you, Ned … only you …” He lifted his hand, the gesture pained and feeble. “Paper and ink. There, on the table. Write what I tell you.”
“劳勃，你该死的，”只剩他们两人后，奈德开口说。他的腿痛得让他几乎睁不开眼。也或许是悲痛模糊了他的视线。他坐到床边，坐在他的朋友身旁。“你非得这么鲁莽不可？”
Ned smoothed the paper out across his knee and took up the quill. “At your command, Your Grace.”
“啊，操你，奈德，”国王粗声道，“我好歹宰了那王八蛋，对不？”一撮蒙尘的黑发落下来遮住他的眼，他抬头瞪着奈德。“我该把你也宰了才对，连打猎都不肯让人安安静静地打。罗拔爵士找到我啦。说什么要砍格雷果的头。想来就不舒服。我没对猎狗讲。让瑟曦去吓吓他罢。”他笑到一半，突然一阵剧痛袭身，便转为闷哼。“诸神慈悲，”他喃喃念道，疼痛地喘气。“那女孩。丹妮莉丝。她只是个孩子，你说得没错……这就是为什么，那女孩……天上诸神派这头野猪……派来惩罚我……”国王咳出一滩鲜血。“错了，我做错了，我……她只是个女孩……瓦里斯，小指头，连我弟弟……废物……奈德，除了你之外，没有人敢对我说一个不……只有你……”他在极度疼痛的状态下，虚弱地举起手。“拿纸笔来。就在那边桌上。把我说的写下来。”
“This is the will and word of Robert of House Baratheon, the First of his Name, King of the Andals and all the rest—put in the damn titles, you know how it goes. I do hereby command Eddard of House Stark, Lord of Winterfell and Hand of the King, to serve as Lord Regent and Protector of the Realm upon my … upon my death … to rule in my … in my stead, until my son Joffrey does come of age …”
奈德把纸摊平在膝盖上，拿起羽毛笔。“陛下，请您指示。”
“Robert …” Joffrey is not your son , he wanted to say, but the words would not come. The agony was written too plainly across Robert’s face; he could not hurt him more. So Ned bent his head and wrote, but where the king had said “my son Joffrey,” he scrawled “my heir” instead. The deceit made him feel soiled. The lies we tell for love , he thought. May the gods forgive me . “What else would you have me say?”
“以下为拜拉席恩家族的劳勃一世，安达尔人和其他人的——把他妈的那些鬼头衔通通放进去，你知道是哪些——的遗嘱。余在此任命临冬城公爵，国王之手，史塔克家族的艾德为摄政王及全境守护者……自余死后……代余……代余统理国事……俟吾儿乔佛里成年……”
“Say … whatever you need to. Protect and defend, gods old and new, you have the words. Write. I’ll sign it. You give it to the council when I’m dead.”
“劳勃……”乔佛里不是你儿子，他想说，却说不出口。劳勃所承受的痛苦清楚明白地写在脸上，他不忍心将更多痛苦加诸于他。于是奈德低头振笔疾书，只将“吾儿乔佛里”改为“吾之合法继承人”。欺瞒让他觉得自己人格污损。这是我们为爱而撒的谎，他心想，愿天上诸神原谅我。“您还要我写什么？”
“Robert,” Ned said in a voice thick with grief, “you must not do this. Don’t die on me. The realm needs you.”
“写……该写什么就写什么。遵守，保护，新旧诸神，你知道这些啰嗦词语。写完我来签名。等我死了把这个交给御前会议。”
Robert took his hand, fingers squeezing hard. “You are … such a bad liar, Ned Stark,” he said through his pain. “The realm … the realm knows … what a wretched king I’ve been. Bad as Aerys, the gods spare me.”
“劳勃，”奈德的语气充满悲伤，“不要这样，不要离开我。国家需要你。”
“No,” Ned told his dying friend, “not so bad as Aerys, Your Grace. Not near so bad as Aerys.”
劳勃紧握住他的手，用力挤压。“奈德·史塔克，你……真不会说谎。”他忍痛说，“这国家……这国家很清楚……我是怎样的一个昏君，跟伊里斯一样的昏君。诸神饶恕我。”
Robert managed a weak red smile. “At the least, they will say … this last thing … this I did right. You won’t fail me. You’ll rule now. You’ll hate it, worse than I did … but you’ll do well. Are you done with the scribbling?”
“不，”奈德告诉他垂死的老友，“陛下，您和伊里斯不一样。您比他好得太多。”
“Yes, Your Grace.” Ned offered Robert the paper. The king scrawled his signature blindly, leaving a smear of blood across the letter. “The seal should be witnessed.”
劳勃勉强挤出一丝微笑，嘴角还带着血迹。“至少，人们会说……我这辈子所做的最后一件事……没有错。你不会让我失望的。这国家就交给你了。你会比我更讨厌治理……但你会做得很好。你写好了么？”
“Serve the boar at my funeral feast,” Robert rasped. “Apple in its mouth, skin seared crisp. Eat the bastard. Don’t care if you choke on him. Promise me, Ned.”
“好了，陛下。”奈德把纸递给国王。国王胡乱签了个名，在字里行间留下一滩血迹。“封印时需有人见证。”
“I promise.” Promise me, Ned , Lyanna’s voice echoed.
“记得把那只野猪当我葬礼的主菜，”劳勃嘶声道，“嘴里塞个苹果，皮烤得香香脆脆，把那王八蛋给吃啰。我管你会不会撑死。答应我，奈德。”
“The girl,” the king said. “Daenerys. Let her live. If you can, if it … not too late … talk to them … Varys, Littlefinger … don’t let them kill her. And help my son, Ned. Make him be … better than me.” He winced. “Gods have mercy.”
“我答应你。”奈德说。答应我，奈德，莱安娜在应和。
“They will, my friend,” Ned said. “They will.”
“那女孩，”国王说，“丹妮莉丝，让她活命吧。如果你有法子，如果……还来得及……命令他们……瓦里斯，小指头……别让他们杀她。还有，帮帮我儿子，奈德。让他变成……比我更好的人。”他痛得皱眉，“诸神可怜我。”
The king closed his eyes and seemed to relax. “Killed by a pig,” he muttered. “Ought to laugh, but it hurts too much.”
“他们会的，我的朋友，”奈德说，“他们会的。”
Ned was not laughing. “Shall I call them back?”
国王闭起眼睛，似是稍觉放松。“到头来竟被野猪所杀，”他喃喃自语，“要不是这么痛，真该大笑一场。”
Robert gave a weak nod. “As you will. Gods, why is it so cold in here?”
奈德没笑。“要不要这就叫他们进来？”
The servants rushed back in and hurried to feed the fires. The queen had gone; that was some small relief, at least. If she had any sense, Cersei would take her children and fly before the break of day, Ned thought. She had lingered too long already.
劳勃虚弱地点头。“也好。老天，这儿怎么冷成这副德行？”
King Robert did not seem to miss her. He bid his brother Renly and Grand Maester Pycelle to stand in witness as he pressed his seal into the hot yellow wax that Ned had dripped upon his letter. “Now give me something for the pain and let me die.”
仆人们冲进来，赶忙为炉火添柴。王后已经走了，至少这算一点安慰。如果瑟曦还有点理智，奈德心想，她应该带着孩子赶在黎明前逃走。她已经拖延太久。
Hurriedly Grand Maester Pycelle mixed him another draught of the milk of the poppy. This time the king drank deeply. His black beard was beaded with thick white droplets when he threw the empty cup aside. “Will I dream?”
劳勃国王也并不想念她。他让弟弟蓝礼和派席尔国师作见证，然后拿起国玺，盖在奈德滴在纸上的热黄蜡泥上。“现在给我止痛的东西，让我去死罢。”
Ned gave him his answer. “You will, my lord.”
派席尔国师匆忙调制了另一帖罂粟花奶。这次国王喝了个干净，抛出杯子，他的黑胡须上沾满了浓稠的白色液滴。“我会做梦吗？”
“Good,” he said, smiling. “I will give Lyanna your love, Ned. Take care of my children for me.”
奈德给了他答案。“陛下，您会的。”
The words twisted in Ned’s belly like a knife. For a moment he was at a loss. He could not bring himself to lie. Then he remembered the bastards: little Barra at her mother’s breast, Mya in the Vale, Gendry at his forge, and all the others. “I shall … guard your children as if they were my own,” he said slowly.
“那就好，”他微笑道，“奈德，我会替你向莱安娜问好。帮我好好照顾我的孩子。”
Robert nodded and closed his eyes. Ned watched his old friend sag softly into the pillows as the milk of the poppy washed the pain from his face. Sleep took him.
这番话有如一把尖刀在奈德肚里翻搅。刹那间他不知如何是好，因为他无法逼自己说谎，但他接着想起了那些私生子，想起还在母亲怀里的芭拉，艾林谷的米亚，炉边打铁的詹德利……“我会……把你的孩子当作我自己的孩子一般爱护。”他缓缓地说。
Heavy chains jangled softly as Grand Maester Pycelle came up to Ned. “I will do all in my power, my lord, but the wound has mortified. It took them two days to get him back. By the time I saw him, it was too late. I can lessen His Grace’s suffering, but only the gods can heal him now.”
劳勃点点头，闭上眼睛。奈德看着罂粟花奶从自己老友脸上洗去疼痛，他软弱无力地陷进枕头堆，沉沉睡去。
“How long?” Ned asked.
沉重的锁链轻声作响，派席尔大学士朝奈德走来。“大人，我会尽我全力，可伤口已经长疽。他们花了两天时间才把他送回来，等我见到伤势为时已晚。我可以减轻陛下的伤痛，但现在能救他的只有天上诸神了。”
“By rights, he should be dead already. I have never seen a man cling to life so fiercely.”
“还能活多久？”奈德问。
“My brother was always strong,” Lord Renly said. “Not wise, perhaps, but strong.” In the sweltering heat of the bedchamber, his brow was slick with sweat. He might have been Robert’s ghost as he stood there, young and dark and handsome. “He slew the boar. His entrails were sliding from his belly, yet somehow he slew the boar.” His voice was full of wonder.
“照理说他现在已经死了。我还从没见过求生意志这么强的人。”
“Robert was never a man to leave the battleground so long as a foe remained standing,” Ned told him.
“我哥一向很强壮，”蓝礼公爵说，“或许不顶聪明，但强壮是勿庸置疑。”卧室里闷热难耐，他的额际布满晶亮的汗珠，模样仿佛是劳勃的翻版，年轻、黝黑而英俊。“他杀了那头猪。也不管自己内脏都从肚子里跑出来了，他还是宰了那头野猪。”他的声音充满惊奇。
Outside the door, Ser Barristan Selmy still guarded the tower stairs. “Maester Pycelle has given Robert the milk of the poppy,” Ned told him. “See that no one disturbs his rest without leave from me.”
“只要敌人还站着，劳勃就决不会离开战场。”奈德告诉他。
“It shall be as you command, my lord.” Ser Barristan seemed old beyond his years. “I have failed my sacred trust.”
门外，巴利斯坦·赛尔弥爵士依旧把守着高塔楼梯。“派席尔大学士已经给劳勃喝过罂粟花奶，”奈德告诉他，“未经我同意，任何人不得打扰他休息。”
“Even the truest knight cannot protect a king against himself,” Ned said. “Robert loved to hunt boar. I have seen him take a thousand of them.” He would stand his ground without flinching, his legs braced, the great spear in his hands, and as often as not he would curse the boar as it charged, and wait until the last possible second, until it was almost on him, before he killed it with a single sure and savage thrust. “No one could know this one would be his death.”
“遵命，大人。”巴利斯坦爵士看起来比他实际年龄还要苍老。“我辜负了我神圣的职责。”
“You are kind to say so, Lord Eddard.”
“再忠勇的骑士，也没法避免国王伤害自己，”奈德说，“劳勃喜欢猎野猪，我看他杀死过不下一千只。”他总是毫不退缩地站稳脚跟，立定原地，手握长枪，还常趁野猪冲锋时大声咒骂，只等最后一刻，只等野猪几乎要扑到他身上时，他才准确利落地将其一枪刺死。“谁知道他竟会被这只猪所杀呢？”
“The king himself said as much. He blamed the wine.”
“艾德大人，您太仁慈了。”
The white-haired knight gave a weary nod. “His Grace was reeling in his saddle by the time we flushed the boar from his lair, yet he commanded us all to stand aside.”
“连国王自己也这么说。他说是酒坏了事。”
“I wonder, Ser Barristan,” asked Varys, so quietly, “who gave the king this wine?”
白发苍苍的骑士虚弱地点头。“我们把野猪从窝里赶出来时，陛下他已经连马都坐不稳了，但他还是命令我们站到一边。”
Ned had not heard the eunuch approach, but when he looked around, there he stood. He wore a black velvet robe that brushed the floor, and his face was freshly powdered.
“巴利斯坦爵士，我倒是很好奇，”瓦里斯轻声细语地问，“这酒是谁拿给国王的？”
“The wine was from the king’s own skin,” Ser Barristan said.
奈德根本没听见太监走近的声音，然而一转头，他就在那儿，穿着曳地的黑天鹅绒长袍，脸上新扑过粉。
“Only one skin? Hunting is such thirsty work.”
“国王喝的是带在自己身上酒袋里的酒。”巴利斯坦爵士道。
“I did not keep count. More than one, for a certainty. His squire would fetch him a fresh skin whenever he required it.”
“就那么一袋？打猎很容易口渴哪。”
“Such a dutiful boy,” said Varys, “to make certain His Grace did not lack for refreshment.”
“我没有数，但陛下喝的肯定不止一袋。只要他开口，他的侍从就会拿一袋新的给他。”
Ned had a bitter taste in his mouth. He recalled the two fair-haired boys Robert had sent chasing after a breastplate stretcher. The king had told everyone the tale that night at the feast, laughing until he shook. “Which squire?”
“真是个忠于职守的好孩子，”瓦里斯道，“陛下他永远都不愁没得喝哟。”
“The elder,” said Ser Barristan. “Lancel.”
奈德嘴里一阵苦涩。他回忆起那两个被劳勃赶去拿撑胸甲的钳子的金发男孩。当天晚宴上，国王把这件事说给每个人听，笑到难以自制。“是哪个侍从？”
“I know the lad well,” said Varys. “A stalwart boy, Ser Kevan Lannister’s son, nephew to Lord Tywin and cousin to the queen. I hope the dear sweet lad does not blame himself. Children are so vulnerable in the innocence of their youth, how well do I remember.”
“年长的那个，”巴利斯坦爵士说，“蓝赛尔。”
Certainly Varys had once been young. Ned doubted that he had ever been innocent. “You mention children. Robert had a change of heart concerning Daenerys Targaryen. Whatever arrangements you made, I want unmade. At once.”
“这孩子我挺清楚的，”瓦里斯说：“是个坚强的男孩，凯冯·兰尼斯特爵士的儿子，泰温大人的侄子，王后的堂弟。真希望这好孩子别太自责。孩子在天真无邪的少年时期总是很脆弱的，这我可是深有体会。”
“Alas,” said Varys. “At once may be too late. I fear those birds have flown. But I shall do what I can, my lord. With your leave.” He bowed and vanished down the steps, his soft-soled slippers whispering against the stone as he made his descent.
瓦里斯自然有过少年时期，但奈德却怀疑他是否天真无邪过。“听你说起孩子，关于丹妮莉丝·坦格利安那件事，劳勃已经回心转意。无论你安排了什么，我要你立刻收回成命。”
Cayn and Tomard were helping Ned across the bridge when Lord Renly emerged from Maegor’s Holdfast. “Lord Eddard,” he called after Ned, “a moment, if you would be so kind.”
“唉哟，”瓦里斯说，“‘立刻’恐怕都为时已晚哪。鸟儿已经飞上了天。不过大人，我尽力而为。告退。”他鞠个躬，消失在楼梯下。下楼之时，软跟的拖鞋在石板表面摩擦，宛如呓语。
Ned stopped. “As you wish.”
凯恩和托马德正扶着奈德过桥，蓝礼公爵却从梅葛楼里出来。“艾德大人，”他在身后喊，“若您不介意，可否借一步说话？”
Renly walked to his side. “Send your men away.” They met in the center of the bridge, the dry moat beneath them. Moonlight silvered the cruel edges of the spikes that lined its bed.
奈德停下脚步。“好。”
Ned gestured. Tomard and Cayn bowed their heads and backed away respectfully. Lord Renly glanced warily at Ser Boros on the far end of the span, at Ser Preston in the doorway behind them. “That letter.” He leaned close. “Was it the regency? Has my brother named you Protector?” He did not wait for a reply. “My lord, I have thirty men in my personal guard, and other friends beside, knights and lords. Give me an hour, and I can put a hundred swords in your hand.”
蓝礼走到他身边。“请您的人退下。”他们站在桥的正中央，桥下是干涸的护城河。河床上排列尖刺，月光将残酷的刀刃染成银白。
“And what should I do with a hundred swords, my lord?”
奈德挥手。托马德和凯恩点点头，恭敬地退开。蓝礼公爵小心翼翼地瞥了瞥桥对面的柏洛斯爵士，以及背后楼梯口的普列斯顿爵士。“那封信，”他靠过来。“可与摄政有关？我哥是否任命您为全境守护者？”他没等对方回答。“大人，我有三十个贴身护卫，还有其他骑士和贵族朋友。给我一个钟头，我就能给您一百个人。”
“Strike! Now, while the castle sleeps.” Renly looked back at Ser Boros again and dropped his voice to an urgent whisper. “We must get Joffrey away from his mother and take him in hand. Protector or no, the man who holds the king holds the kingdom. We should seize Myrcella and Tommen as well. Once we have her children, Cersei will not dare oppose us. The council will confirm you as Lord Protector and make Joffrey your ward.”
“大人，请问我要这一百人做什么呢？”
Ned regarded him coldly. “Robert is not dead yet. The gods may spare him. If not, I shall convene the council to hear his final words and consider the matter of the succession, but I will not dishonor his last hours on earth by shedding blood in his halls and dragging frightened children from their beds.”
“当然是先发制人！立即行动，趁眼下大家还在熟睡。”蓝礼回头看看柏洛斯爵士，压低音量，急切地悄声说，“我们得把乔佛里从他母亲手里夺过来当筹码，是不是守护者无关紧要，谁挟有国王才能号令全国。弥赛拉和托曼也要抓起来。一旦我们有了瑟曦的孩子，她就不敢轻举妄动。到时候御前会议将承认您为摄政王，并让您当乔佛里的监护人。”
Lord Renly took a step back, taut as a bowstring. “Every moment you delay gives Cersei another moment to prepare. By the time Robert dies, it may be too late … for both of us.”
奈德冷冷地打量着他。“劳勃还未断气。天上诸神或许会饶他一命也未可知。倘非如是，我也将立刻召集御前会议，公开遗嘱，讨论继承之事。我不会在他生命的最后时刻杀人流血，犯下把惊慌失措的孩子从睡梦中强行拉走的罪行。”
“Then we should pray that Robert does not die.”
蓝礼公爵后退一步，全身绷紧犹如弓弦。“你每耽搁一秒，就是多给瑟曦一秒准备的时间。等劳勃一死，只怕就为时已晚……对你我两人都是如此啊。”
“Small chance of that,” said Renly.
“那我们就祈祷劳勃不要死吧。”
“Sometimes the gods are merciful.”
“我看不大可能。”
“The Lannisters are not.” Lord Renly turned away and went back across the moat, to the tower where his brother lay dying.
“有时天上诸神也有慈悲之心。”
By the time Ned returned to his chambers, he felt weary and heartsick, yet there was no question of his going back to sleep, not now. When you play the game of thrones, you win or you die , Cersei Lannister had told him in the godswood. He found himself wondering if he had done the right thing by refusing Lord Renly’s offer. He had no taste for these intrigues, and there was no honor in threatening children, and yet … if Cersei elected to fight rather than flee, he might well have need of Renly’s hundred swords, and more besides.
“兰尼斯特可没有。”蓝礼转身越过护城河，朝他垂死兄长所在的高塔走去。
“I want Littlefinger,” he told Cayn. “If he’s not in his chambers, take as many men as you need and search every winesink and whorehouse in King’s Landing until you find him. Bring him to me before break of day.” Cayn bowed and took his leave, and Ned turned to Tomard. “The Wind Witch sails on the evening tide. Have you chosen the escort?”
等奈德回到卧室，已经心力交瘁，但他很清楚今晚自己是不用睡了。在权力的游戏之中，你不当赢家，就只有死路一条，那天在神木林里，瑟曦·兰尼斯特这么对他说。他不禁思索：拒绝蓝礼公爵的提议，究竟是不是明智之举？他对权谋斗争毫无兴趣，拿小孩做为要胁筹码更为他所不齿，然而……倘若瑟曦决定反抗，而非流亡，那他需要的可就不仅是蓝礼的一百名卫士了，远远不够。
“Ten men, with Porther in command.”
“把小指头找来，”他告诉凯恩，“如果他不在卧室，不管带多少人，把君临的每一间酒店和妓院通通搜遍，你也要找到他。天亮之前必须带他来见我。”凯恩鞠躬离去，奈德又转向托马德，“风之巫女号明晚涨潮时分启航，你选好随行护卫了吗？”
“Twenty, and you will command,” Ned said. Porther was a brave man, but headstrong. He wanted someone more solid and sensible to keep watch over his daughters.
“十个人，由波瑟领队。”
“As you wish, m’lord,” Tom said. “Can’t say I’ll be sad to see the back of this place. I miss the wife.”
“二十个，你亲自带头。”奈德说。波瑟虽然勇敢，却嫌鲁莽。他希望照顾女儿的人更可靠也更有判断力。
“You will pass near Dragonstone when you turn north. I need you to deliver a letter for me.”
“遵命，老爷，”汤姆说，“说真的，离开这里，我可不会难过。我很想念我老婆。”
Tom looked apprehensive. “To Dragonstone, m’lord?” The island fortress of House Targaryen had a sinister repute.
“你们北行途中会靠近龙石岛，我需要你替我送封信。”
“Tell Captain Qos to hoist my banner as soon as he comes in sight of the island. They may be wary of unexpected visitors. If he is reluctant, offer him whatever it takes. I will give you a letter to place into the hand of Lord Stannis Baratheon. No one else. Not his steward, nor the captain of his guard, nor his lady wife, but only Lord Stannis himself.”
汤姆一脸不安。“大人，去龙石岛？”坦格利安家族的这座岛屿要塞素以地势险恶著称。
“As you command, m’lord.”
“告诉柯斯船长，一旦进入岛屿的视线范围，即刻升上我的旗帜。他们恐怕不会欢迎不请自来的访客。如果他不肯去，要多少钱都给他。我给你的这封信，你必须当面交给史坦尼斯·拜拉席恩大人，绝不能交给别人。不管是他的总管、侍卫队长或他的夫人都一样，一定要交给史坦尼斯公爵本人。”
When Tomard had left him, Lord Eddard Stark sat staring at the flame of the candle that burned beside him on the table. For a moment his grief overwhelmed him. He wanted nothing so much as to seek out the godswood, to kneel before the heart tree and pray for the life of Robert Baratheon, who had been more than a brother to him. Men would whisper afterward that Eddard Stark had betrayed his king’s friendship and disinherited his sons; he could only hope that the gods would know better, and that Robert would learn the truth of it in the land beyond the grave.
“是的，大人。”
Ned took out the king’s last letter. A roll of crisp white parchment sealed with golden wax, a few short words and a smear of blood. How small the difference between victory and defeat, between life and death.
托马德离开后，艾德·史塔克坐着凝望床边桌上的蜡烛明焰，有好一阵子完全被悲伤所淹没。他只想去神木林，跪在心树下，祈祷那曾经与他情胜手足的劳勃·拜拉席恩能够活命。将来人们会说艾德·史塔克背叛了国王的友谊，夺走了他子嗣的继承权。他只希望天上诸神能体谅他的苦衷，而劳勃若死后有知，也能知悉真相。
He drew out a fresh sheet of paper and dipped his quill in the inkpot. To His Grace, Stannis of the House Baratheon , he wrote. By the time you receive this letter, your brother Robert, our King these past fifteen years, will be dead. He was savaged by a boar whilst hunting in the kingswood …
奈德取出国王的临终遗嘱。那只是一张盖上黄色蜡印，写了只字片语，却留下一滩血迹的脆弱的白色卷轴。胜负生死，实在只是一线之间。
The letters seemed to writhe and twist on the paper as his hand trailed to a stop. Lord Tywin and Ser Jaime were not men to suffer disgrace meekly; they would fight rather than flee. No doubt Lord Stannis was wary, after the murder of Jon Arryn, but it was imperative that he sail for King’s Landing at once with all his power, before the Lannisters could march.
他抽出一张白纸，取笔沾了墨水。致拜拉席恩家族的史坦尼斯国王陛下，他写道，当您接获此信之时，令兄劳勃，吾人过去十五年来的国君，已经过世。他在御林狩猎时为一野猪所伤……
Ned chose each word with care. When he was done, he signed the letter Eddard Stark, Lord of Winterfell, Hand of the King, and Protector of the Realm , blotted the paper, folded it twice, and melted the sealing wax over the candle flame.
字句似乎在纸上扭曲缠绕，他不得不停笔思考。泰温大人和詹姆爵士绝不会忍受耻辱，他们宁可兴兵反抗也不会逃走。自琼恩·艾林遭人谋害，想必史坦尼斯大人也颇感恐惧，但此刻他必须趁兰尼斯特军还未出动之机，立即率领所部人马驶向君临。
His regency would be a short one, he reflected as the wax softened. The new king would choose his own Hand. Ned would be free to go home. The thought of Winterfell brought a wan smile to his face. He wanted to hear Bran’s laughter once more, to go hawking with Robb, to watch Rickon at play. He wanted to drift off to a dreamless sleep in his own bed with his arms wrapped tight around his lady, Catelyn.
奈德字斟句酌写完了信，在末尾签上“全境守护者，国王之手，临冬城公爵，艾德·史塔克。”然后吸干墨水，对折两次，就着烛焰融了封蜡。
Cayn returned as he was pressing the direwolf seal down into the soft white wax. Desmond was with him, and between them Littlefinger. Ned thanked his guards and sent them away.
他的摄政期将会非常短暂，他一边看着封蜡变软，一边想。新王会任命新的首相。届时奈德便可返家。回临冬城的念头牵起他嘴角一丝微笑。他想重听布兰的欢笑，想和罗柏一同出外放鹰，想看瑞肯玩耍嬉闹。他想双手紧紧搂着自己的夫人凯特琳，躺在自己的床上无梦安眠。
Lord Petyr was clad in a blue velvet tunic with puffed sleeves, his silvery cape patterned with mockingbirds. “I suppose congratulations are in order,” he said as he seated himself.
他正把冰原狼印章盖在柔软的白蜡上时，凯恩回来了，戴斯蒙跟他一道，小指头则走在两人中间。奈德向侍卫道谢后把他俩遣开。
Ned scowled. “The king lies wounded and near to death.”
培提尔伯爵穿着蓝天鹅绒外衣，带着宽松的袖子，银边斗篷上绣满仿声鸟。“我想我该说恭喜啰。”他边说边坐下。
“I know,” Littlefinger said. “I also know that Robert has named you Protector of the Realm.”
奈德皱眉。“国王此刻身负重伤，命在旦夕。”
Ned’s eyes flicked to the king’s letter on the table beside him, its seal unbroken. “And how is it you know that, my lord?”
“我知道，”小指头说，“但我也知道他任命您为全境守护者。”
“Varys hinted as much,” Littlefinger said, “and you have just confirmed it.”
奈德的视线飘到身旁桌上，国王的信还未拆封。“大人，请问您又是怎么知道的？”
Ned’s mouth twisted in anger. “Damn Varys and his little birds. Catelyn spoke truly, the man has some black art. I do not trust him.”
“瓦里斯的暗示，”小指头说，“而您现在证实了。”
“Excellent. You’re learning.” Littlefinger leaned forward. “Yet I’ll wager you did not drag me here in the black of night to discuss the eunuch.”
奈德的嘴因愤怒而扭曲：“去他的瓦里斯和他的小小鸟儿。凯特琳说得没错，这人懂妖法。我不信任他。”
“No,” Ned admitted. “I know the secret Jon Arryn was murdered to protect. Robert will leave no trueborn son behind him. Joffrey and Tommen are Jaime Lannister’s bastards, born of his incestuous union with the queen.”
“很好，你慢慢学乖了。”小指头向前靠，“可我敢打赌你大半夜把我拖来，不是来讨论太监的。”
Littlefinger lifted an eyebrow. “Shocking,” he said in a tone that suggested he was not shocked at all. “The girl as well? No doubt. So when the king dies …”
“不是，”奈德承认，“我知道了琼恩·艾林保守的秘密，他便是因此遭人灭口。劳勃死后没有亲生儿子可以继承王位。乔佛里和托曼是詹姆·兰尼斯特和王后乱伦产下的私生子。”
“The throne by rights passes to Lord Stannis, the elder of Robert’s two brothers.”
小指头扬起一道眉毛。“令人震惊。”然而他的语气显然完全不感惊讶。“女孩也是？想也知道。所以国王死后……”
Lord Petyr stroked his pointed beard as he considered the matter. “So it would seem. Unless …”
“王位应传给史坦尼斯大人，劳勃最年长的弟弟。”
“Unless , my lord? There is no seeming to this. Stannis is the heir. Nothing can change that.”
培提尔伯爵捻着尖胡子，仔细思索这个问题。“看来是如此。除非……”
“Stannis cannot take the throne without your help. If you’re wise, you’ll make certain Joffrey succeeds.”
“大人，除非？这事没有任何疑问。史坦尼斯是王位继承人，没有什么可以改变这事实。”
Ned gave him a stony stare. “Have you no shred of honor?”
“缺了你的协助，史坦尼斯得不到王位。如果你够聪明，应该确保乔佛里登基为王。”
“Oh, a shred , surely,” Littlefinger replied negligently. “Hear me out. Stannis is no friend of yours, nor of mine. Even his brothers can scarcely stomach him. The man is iron, hard and unyielding. He’ll give us a new Hand and a new council, for a certainty. No doubt he’ll thank you for handing him the crown, but he won’t love you for it. And his ascent will mean war. Stannis cannot rest easy on the throne until Cersei and her bastards are dead. Do you think Lord Tywin will sit idly while his daughter’s head is measured for a spike? Casterly Rock will rise, and not alone. Robert found it in him to pardon men who served King Aerys, so long as they did him fealty. Stannis is less forgiving. He will not have forgotten the siege of Storm’s End, and the Lords Tyrell and Redwyne dare not. Every man who fought beneath the dragon banner or rose with Balon Greyjoy will have good cause to fear. Seat Stannis on the Iron Throne and I promise you, the realm will bleed.
奈德狠狠地瞪了他一眼。“你一点荣誉心都没有吗？”
“Now look at the other side of the coin. Joffrey is but twelve, and Robert gave you the regency, my lord. You are the Hand of the King and Protector of the Realm. The power is yours, Lord Stark. All you need do is reach out and take it. Make your peace with the Lannisters. Release the Imp. Wed Joffrey to your Sansa. Wed your younger girl to Prince Tommen, and your heir to Myrcella. It will be four years before Joffrey comes of age. By then he will look to you as a second father, and if not, well … four years is a good long while, my lord. Long enough to dispose of Lord Stannis. Then, should Joffrey prove troublesome, we can reveal his little secret and put Lord Renly on the throne.”
“哎，有当然是有那么一点点啦。”小指头漫不经心地回答，“仔细听我说。史坦尼斯并非你我之友，连他兄弟两人都受不了他。这家伙是钢铁铸的，个性强硬、绝不妥协。想也知道，届时他会另立新的首相和御前会议。他当然会谢谢你把王冠交给他，但他不会因此而喜欢你。更何况他一旦登基，必定会引来战事。你想想，除非瑟曦和她的私生子通通死光，否则史坦尼斯的王位绝对坐不安稳。泰温大人会坐视他女儿的头给晾在枪上吗？凯岩城肯定会起兵，而他们绝非势单力薄。劳勃愿意赦免曾在伊里斯王手下做事的人，只要他们向他宣誓效忠。史坦尼斯可没这么好心肠。他永远不会忘记风息堡之围，提利尔大人和雷德温大人则是不敢忘记。只要曾经高举火龙旗帜，或与巴隆·葛雷乔伊一同兴兵作乱的人都会怕他。若是把史坦尼斯送上铁王座，我敢向你保证，王国会血流成河。”
“We?” Ned repeated.
“我们再看看钱币的另一面。乔佛里眼下才十二岁，而且大人，劳勃选的摄政王是你啊。你既是首相，又是全境守护者。史塔克大人，你是大权在握，只需伸手便可夺取天下。与兰尼斯特家和好，释放小恶魔，让乔佛里和你的珊莎结婚，再把你的小女儿嫁给托曼，让你的继承人迎娶弥赛拉。距离乔佛里长大成人还有四年时间，到时候他会把您当成再世生父，就算他没有，这个嘛……大人，四年时间可也不短，足够把史坦尼斯大人解决掉了。之后若是乔佛里惹人厌，我们可以揭穿他的小秘密，然后把蓝礼大人送上王位。”
Littlefinger gave a shrug. “You’ll need someone to share your burdens. I assure you, my price would be modest.”
“我们？”奈德重复道。
“Your price.” Ned’s voice was ice. “Lord Baelish, what you suggest is treason.”
小指头耸耸肩。“您总需要别人来帮您分担重责大任吧。我可以跟您保证，我的价码绝对最公道。”
“Only if we lose.”
“你的价码。”奈德声音冰冷。“贝里席大人，你刚才建议的可是叛国大罪。”
“You forget,” Ned told him. “You forget Jon Arryn. You forget Jory Cassel. And you forget this.” He drew the dagger and laid it on the table between them; a length of dragonbone and Valyrian steel, as sharp as the difference between right and wrong, between true and false, between life and death. “They sent a man to cut my son’s throat , Lord Baelish.”
“除非我们失败。”
Littlefinger sighed. “I fear I did forget, my lord. Pray forgive me. For a moment I did not remember that I was talking to a Stark.” His mouth quirked. “So it will be Stannis, and war?”
“你忘了，”奈德告诉他，“你忘了琼恩·艾林，你忘了乔里·凯索，你还忘了这个。”他抽出那把匕首，放在两人中间的桌上。由龙骨和瓦雷利亚精钢打造的短刀，锋利一如对与错、真与假，生与死之间的差异。“贝里席大人，他们派人杀我儿子。”
“It is not a choice. Stannis is the heir.”
小指头叹口气。“恐怕我真是忘了，大人，请您原谅。我居然忘了自己在跟史塔克家的人说话。”他撇撇嘴。“所以就是史坦尼斯和战争？”
“Far be it from me to dispute the Lord Protector. What would you have of me, then? Not my wisdom, for a certainty.”
“我们别无选择，史坦尼斯是继承人。”
“I shall do my best to forget your … wisdom,” Ned said with distaste. “I called you here to ask for the help you promised Catelyn. This is a perilous hour for all of us. Robert has named me Protector, true enough, but in the eyes of the world, Joffrey is still his son and heir. The queen has a dozen knights and a hundred men-at-arms who will do whatever she commands … enough to overwhelm what remains of my own household guard. And for all I know, her brother Jaime may be riding for King’s Landing even as we speak, with a Lannister host at his back.”
“反正我也没资格和全境守护者争辩。那么，您找我有何贵干？想必不是为了我的智慧。”
“And you without an army.” Littlefinger toyed with the dagger on the table, turning it slowly with a finger. “There is small love lost between Lord Renly and the Lannisters. Bronze Yohn Royce, Ser Balon Swann, Ser Loras, Lady Tanda, the Redwyne twins … each of them has a retinue of knights and sworn swords here at court.”
“我会尽我所能忘记你的……智慧，”奈德嫌恶地说，“我找你来，是因为你答应过凯特琳会帮忙。眼下对我们每个人都是危险时刻。劳勃的确任命我为守护者，但在世人眼中，乔佛里依旧是他的儿子和继承人。王后身边有十来个骑士和上百名侍卫听候差遣……足够对付我留在身边的护卫。况且就在我们说话的当口，她弟弟詹姆很可能正率领兰尼斯特大军，浩浩荡荡朝君临开来。”
“Renly has thirty men in his personal guard, the rest even fewer. It is not enough, even if I could be certain that all of them will choose to give me their allegiance. I must have the gold cloaks. The City Watch is two thousand strong, sworn to defend the castle, the city, and the king’s peace.”
“而你却没有军队。”小指头把玩着桌上的匕首，用一根指头缓缓旋转。“蓝礼大人和兰尼斯特家之间素无好感。青铜约恩·罗伊斯，巴隆·史文爵士，洛拉斯爵士，坦妲伯爵夫人，还有雷德温家的双胞胎……他们各自有一批骑士和侍卫在城里。”
“Ah, but when the queen proclaims one king and the Hand another, whose peace do they protect?” Lord Petyr flicked at the dagger with his finger, setting it spinning in place. Round and round it went, wobbling as it turned. When at last it slowed to a stop, the blade pointed at Littlefinger. “Why, there’s your answer,” he said, smiling. “They follow the man who pays them.” He leaned back and looked Ned full in the face, his grey-green eyes bright with mockery. “You wear your honor like a suit of armor, Stark. You think it keeps you safe, but all it does is weigh you down and make it hard for you to move. Look at you now. You know why you summoned me here. You know what you want to ask me to do. You know it has to be done … but it’s not honorable , so the words stick in your throat.”
“蓝礼有三十个贴身护卫，其他人更少。就算他们全站到我这边，也还是不够。我需要都城守卫队的支持。他们一共有两千人，并宣誓守护城堡与市镇，以国王之名维护和平。”
Ned’s neck was rigid with tension. For a moment he was so angry that he did not trust himself to speak.
“啊，可是当王后立了一个国王，首相却立了另一个，请问他们要以谁之名维护和平呢？”培提尔伯爵伸出手指轻推匕首，让它在原地打转。匕首旋转不息，边转边摇晃。最后速度减缓，终至停止时，刀尖正对着小指头。“唉，这就是答案啦。”他微笑道，“谁付钱，他们就听谁的话。”他向后靠上椅背，直直地看着奈德的脸，那双灰绿的眼睛里闪着嘲弄之色。“史塔克，你把荣誉当铠甲穿在身上，自以为能保你平安，结果却让自己负担沉重，行动困难。瞧你现在这个样子：你很清楚找我来目的为何，也知道要请我做什么，更明白这件事势在必行……可一点也不名誉，所以话哽在喉咙里说不出来。”
Littlefinger laughed. “I ought to make you say it, but that would be cruel … so have no fear, my good lord. For the sake of the love I bear for Catelyn, I will go to Janos Slynt this very hour and make certain that the City Watch is yours. Six thousand gold pieces should do it. A third for the Commander, a third for the officers, a third for the men. We might be able to buy them for half that much, but I prefer not to take chances.” Smiling, he plucked up the dagger and offered it to Ned, hilt first.
奈德的颈项因为紧张而僵硬，有好一阵子他委实太过恼怒，以致不敢轻易开口。
*JON
小指头笑道：“我应该逼你亲口说出来的，但那样太残忍啦……所以我亲爱的好大人，您别担心。为着我对凯特琳的爱，我这就去找杰诺斯·史林特，确保都城守卫队站在您这边。六千金龙应该足够。三分之一给司令，三分之一给各层士官，剩下的三分之一留给士兵。本来用这价钱的一半或许也行，不过我还是别冒险的好。”他面露微笑，拾起匕首交还奈德，刀柄朝向对方。
J on was breaking his fast on applecakes and blood sausage when Samwell Tarly plopped himself down on the bench. “I’ve been summoned to the sept,” Sam said in an excited whisper. “They’re passing me out of training. I’m to be made a brother with the rest of you. Can you believe it?”
第四十九章 琼恩
“No, truly?”
山姆威尔·塔利扑通一声坐上长凳时，琼恩正吃着早餐的苹果蛋糕和血香肠。“我也要去圣堂了，”山姆难掩兴奋地悄声说，“他们打算让我通过测试，跟你们一起成为正式的黑衣弟兄。你敢相信吗？”
“Truly. I’m to assist Maester Aemon with the library and the birds. He needs someone who can read and write letters.”
“不相信。这是真的？”
“You’ll do well at that,” Jon said, smiling.
“真的真的。我被派去协助伊蒙师傅管理图书室和鸟儿。他需要一个能读会写的帮手。”
Sam glanced about anxiously. “Is it time to go? I shouldn’t be late, they might change their minds.” He was fairly bouncing as they crossed the weed-strewn courtyard. The day was warm and sunny. Rivulets of water trickled down the sides of the Wall, so the ice seemed to sparkle and shine.
“相信你一定愉快胜任。”琼恩微笑说道。
Inside the sept, the great crystal caught the morning light as it streamed through the south-facing window and spread it in a rainbow on the altar. Pyp’s mouth dropped open when he caught sight of Sam, and Toad poked Grenn in the ribs, but no one dared say a word. Septon Celladar was swinging a censer, filling the air with fragrant incense that reminded Jon of Lady Stark’s little sept in Winterfell. For once the septon seemed sober.
山姆不安地环顾四周。“我们是不是该去了？我们最好不要迟到，免得他们改变主意。”他们走过长满杂草的庭院时，他一直蹦蹦跳跳。天气温润而清朗，晶莹的水滴沿着长城流淌而下，冰层在阳光下闪闪发光。
The high officers arrived in a body; Maester Aemon leaning on Clydas, Ser Alliser cold-eyed and grim, Lord Commander Mormont resplendent in a black wool doublet with silvered bearclaw fastenings. Behind them came the senior members of the three orders: red-faced Bowen Marsh the Lord Steward, First Builder Othell Yarwyck, and Ser Jaremy Rykker, who commanded the rangers in the absence of Benjen Stark.
圣堂里，晨光从面南的窗子倾泄进来，射进当中的大水晶，散出七彩虹光，映着祭坛。派普一见山姆，嘴巴顿时张得老大，陶德则碰了一下葛兰，但没人敢说话。赛勒达修士手中摇晃着一个小香炉，溢得满室馨香，琼恩不禁想起史塔克夫人在临冬城的小圣堂祈祷的情景。修士这次很难得没有喝醉。
Mormont stood before the altar, the rainbow shining on his broad bald head. “You came to us outlaws,” he began, “poachers, rapers, debtors, killers, and thieves. You came to us children. You came to us alone, in chains, with neither friends nor honor. You came to us rich, and you came to us poor. Some of you bear the names of proud houses. Others have only bastards’ names, or no names at all. It makes no matter. All that is past now. On the Wall, we are all one house.
高级官员一齐抵达。伊蒙师傅倚靠着克莱达斯，艾里沙爵士冷眼峻脸，莫尔蒙司令一身华服，黑羊毛外衣，银边熊爪扣。在他们后面是三个职业的负责人：总务长波文·马尔锡，首席工匠奥赛尔·亚威克，以及暂代班扬·史塔克指挥游骑兵的杰瑞米·莱克爵士。
“At evenfall, as the sun sets and we face the gathering night, you shall take your vows. From that moment, you will be a Sworn Brother of the Night’s Watch. Your crimes will be washed away, your debts forgiven. So too you must wash away your former loyalties, put aside your grudges, forget old wrongs and old loves alike. Here you begin anew.
莫尔蒙站在祭坛前，七彩虹光在他的大光头上闪闪发亮。“你们来时为法律所不容，”他开口，“盗猎、强奸、欠债、杀人、偷抢拐骗。你们来时尚为孩童，一身孑然，身负枷锁，既无友朋，更无荣誉。你们来时或富贵荣禄，或赤贫如洗。你们来自豪门望族，或仅有私生子之名，甚或藉藉无名，但这些都不重要。一切皆成过去。长城之上，我们都是一家人。”
“A man of the Night’s Watch lives his life for the realm. Not for a king, nor a lord, nor the honor of this house or that house, neither for gold nor glory nor a woman’s love, but for the realm , and all the people in it. A man of the Night’s Watch takes no wife and fathers no sons. Our wife is duty. Our mistress is honor. And you are the only sons we shall ever know.
“今日傍晚，夕阳西沉，低垂夜幕之下，你们便将宣誓。从此以后，你们就是誓言效命的守夜人弟兄。你们的罪名将被洗清，债务业已勾销，同样，你们必须抹去从前的家族忠诚，抛开旧时的仇恨，忘却过往的情爱恩怨。你们将于兹重获新生。”
“You have learned the words of the vow. Think carefully before you say them, for once you have taken the black, there is no turning back. The penalty for desertion is death.” The Old Bear paused for a moment before he said, “Are there any among you who wish to leave our company? If so, go now, and no one shall think the less of you.”
“守夜人为王国效命。非为国王，非为贵族，亦非为豪门荣辱，不论财富，不论光荣，亦不论儿女情爱，一切只为王国安泰及其子民平安。守夜人不娶妻，不生子，我们以责任为妻，以荣誉为妾，而你们则是我们惟一的儿子。”
No one moved.
“你们已经听过了誓言内容。在发誓前请仔细考虑，一旦穿上黑衣，便永无退路。背离职守是惟一死刑。”熊老暂停片刻，然后继续，“你们之中有没有人想离开？如果有，现在就走，我们绝不会因此而看轻你。”
“Well and good,” said Mormont. “You may take your vows here at evenfall, before Septon Celladar and the first of your order. Do any of you keep to the old gods?”
无人移动。
Jon stood. “I do, my lord.”
“很好，”莫尔蒙道，“傍晚时分，你们回到这里，当着赛勒达修士和你们所属组织首席的面宣誓。你们中有信仰旧神的吗？”
“I expect you will want to say your words before a heart tree, as your uncle did,” Mormont said.
琼恩站起来。“有的，大人。”
“Yes, my lord,” Jon said. The gods of the sept had nothing to do with him; the blood of the First Men flowed in the veins of the Starks.
“我想你或许情愿跟你叔叔一样，在心树之下宣誓。”莫尔蒙说。
He heard Grenn whispering behind him. “There’s no godswood here. Is there? I never saw a godswood.”
“是的，大人。”琼恩道。圣堂的诸神与他无关。先民的血液依旧流淌在史塔克家人体内。
“You wouldn’t see a herd of aurochs until they trampled you into the snow,” Pyp whispered back.
他听见葛兰在背后低语：“这里没有神木林罢，对不对？我从来没发现。”
“I would so,” Grenn insisted. “I’d see them a long way off.”
“你啊，就算一群野牛迎面冲来，等它们把你踩进雪里，你也没发现。”派普悄声回答。
Mormont himself confirmed Grenn’s doubts. “Castle Black has no need of a godswood. Beyond the Wall the haunted forest stands as it stood in the Dawn Age, long before the Andals brought the Seven across the narrow sea. You will find a grove of weirwoods half a league from this spot, and mayhap your gods as well.”
“我会啦，”葛兰坚持，“我大老远就会看见它们。”
“My lord.” The voice made Jon glance back in surprise. Samwell Tarly was on his feet. The fat boy wiped his sweaty palms against his tunic. “Might I … might I go as well? To say my words at this heart tree?”
莫尔蒙倒是证实了葛兰的疑虑。“黑城堡无需神木林。鬼影森林早在安达尔人将七神带过狭海前的黎明纪元便已耸立在长城之外，至今依然。由此向北半里格你会找到一片鱼梁木，或许也会找到你的神。”
“Does House Tarly keep the old gods too?” Mormont asked.
“大人，”琼恩惊讶地回头，看见肥胖的山姆威尔·塔利站了起来，将满是汗水的手掌在衣服上抹了抹。“我能……我能不能跟他一起去？到心树下宣誓？”
“No, my lord,” Sam replied in a thin, nervous voice. The high officers frightened him, Jon knew, the Old Bear most of all. “I was named in the light of the Seven at the sept on Horn Hill, as my father was, and his father, and all the Tarlys for a thousand years.”
“塔利家族莫非信奉旧神？”莫尔蒙问。
“Why would you forsake the gods of your father and your House?” wondered Ser Jaremy Rykker.
“不是的，大人，”山姆用尖细而紧张的声音回答。琼恩知道官员们很叫他害怕，熊老尤甚。“我在七神的荣光照耀下，在角陵的圣堂里举行了命名仪式。我父亲如此，他的父亲亦如此，千年来塔利家族世代如此。”
“The Night’s Watch is my House now,” Sam said. “The Seven have never answered my prayers. Perhaps the old gods will.”
“那么……你为何要抛弃令尊和你家族长久以来信仰的诸神呢？”杰瑞米·莱克爵士很好奇。
“As you wish, boy,” Mormont said. Sam took his seat again, as did Jon. “We have placed each of you in an order, as befits our need and your own strengths and skills.” Bowen Marsh stepped forward and handed him a paper. The Lord Commander unrolled it and began to read. “Halder, to the builders,” he began. Halder gave a stiff nod of approval. “Grenn, to the rangers. Albett, to the builders. Pypar, to the rangers,” Pyp looked over at Jon and wiggled his ears. “Samwell, to the stewards,” Sam sagged with relief, mopping at his brow with a scrap of silk. “Matthar, to the rangers. Dareon, to the stewards. Todder, to the rangers. Jon, to the stewards.”
“如今我以守夜人军团为家，”山姆信誓旦旦地说，“七神从未回应我的祈祷，或许旧神会呢。”
The stewards! For a moment Jon could not believe what he had heard. Mormont must have read it wrong. He started to rise, to open his mouth, to tell them there had been a mistake … and then he saw Ser Alliser studying him, eyes shiny as two flakes of obsidian, and he knew.
“那就这样，小子。”莫尔蒙说。山姆和琼恩返身坐下。“依照我们的需求，以及你们自身的能力和技巧，你们将被分配到不同的岗位。”波文·马尔锡前跨一步，交给他一张纸。总司令摊开纸，“霍德，加入工匠，”他开始念，只见霍德僵硬而激动地点了点头，“葛兰，加入游骑兵。阿贝特，加入工匠。派普尔，加入游骑兵，”派普看看琼恩，兴奋地摇耳朵。“山姆威尔，加入事务官。”山姆如释重负地叹了口气，忙掏出一块丝巾擦干额头。“梅沙，加入游骑兵。戴利恩，加入事务官。陶德，加入游骑兵。琼恩，加入事务官。”
The Old Bear rolled up the paper. “Your firsts will instruct you in your duties. May all the gods preserve you, brothers.” The Lord Commander favored them with a half bow, and took his leave. Ser Alliser went with him, a thin smile on his face. Jon had never seen the master-at-arms look quite so happy.
事务官？一时之间琼恩简直不敢相信自己的耳朵。莫尔蒙一定是念错了。他正准备站起来申诉，告诉他们弄错了……却看见艾里沙爵士正审视着自己，双眼闪亮犹如黑曜石块，他顿时恍然大悟。
“Rangers with me,” Ser Jaremy Rykker called when they were gone. Pyp was staring at Jon as he got slowly to his feet. His ears were red. Grenn, grinning broadly, did not seem to realize that anything was amiss. Matt and Toad fell in beside them, and they followed Ser Jaremy from the sept.
熊老卷起纸。“你们各自的首席长官会介绍你们的职责所在。弟兄们，愿天上诸神眷顾你们。”总司令向他们微微颔首致意，便即离开。艾里沙爵士跟他一道，脸上挂着一抹浅浅的微笑。琼恩从没见教头这么开心过。
“Builders,” announced lantern-jawed Othell Yarwyck. Halder and Albett trailed out after him.
“游骑兵跟我来。”等他们走后，杰瑞米·莱克爵士喊。派普慢慢站立，眼睛却盯着琼恩，双耳通红。葛兰开心地嘻笑，丝毫未察觉有何不对。梅沙和陶德走到他们旁边，跟随杰瑞米爵士离开圣堂。
Jon looked around him in sick disbelief. Maester Aemon’s blind eyes were raised toward the light he could not see. The septon was arranging crystals on the altar. Only Sam and Dareon remained on the benches; a fat boy, a singer … and him.
“工匠。”生着灯笼下巴的奥赛尔·亚威克随即宣布，然后霍德和阿贝特也跟他走了。
Lord Steward Bowen Marsh rubbed his plump hands together. “Samwell, you will assist Maester Aemon in the rookery and library. Chett is going to the kennels, to help with the hounds. You shall have his cell, so as to be close to the maester night and day. I trust you will take good care of him. He is very old and very precious to us.
琼恩满心嫌恶地环顾四周。只见伊蒙学士的盲眼正朝他看不见的光源望去，修士正在那里整理祭坛的水晶。山姆和戴利恩还坐在板凳上，一个胖子，一个歌手……还有他。
“Dareon, I am told that you sang at many a high lord’s table and shared their meat and mead. We are sending you to Eastwatch. It may be your palate will be some help to Cotter Pyke when merchant galleys come trading. We are paying too dear for salt beef and pickled fish, and the quality of the olive oil we’re getting has been frightful. Present yourself to Borcas when you arrive, he will keep you busy between ships.”
总务长波文·马尔锡搓搓他的胖手。“山姆威尔，你去帮伊蒙学士管理鸟笼和图书室。齐特已被调去犬栏照顾猎狗，你就住他那间屋，以便随时照顾学士的起居。希望你好好工作，他老人家年事已高，对我们更是弥足珍贵。”
Marsh turned his smile on Jon. “Lord Commander Mormont has requested you for his personal steward, Jon. You’ll sleep in a cell beneath his chambers, in the Lord Commander’s tower.”
“戴利恩，我听说你在不少高官老爷面前表演过，也见过一点世面，所以我们派你去东海望协助卡特·派克。等商船前来交易时，你的本领或许能派上用场。近来腌牛肉和咸鱼的价格高得惊人，橄榄油的品质则是烂得吓人。你到了之后先找波卡斯，他会交代你如何与商船交涉。”
“And what will my duties be?” Jon asked sharply. “Will I serve the Lord Commander’s meals, help him fasten his clothes, fetch hot water for his bath?”
马尔锡微笑着转头望向琼恩。“琼恩，莫尔蒙司令特别要你当他的私人事务官。你将睡在他卧室楼下的那间房里，住在司令塔里面。”
“Certainly.” Marsh frowned at Jon’s tone. “And you will run his messages, keep a fire burning in his chambers, change his sheets and blankets daily, and do all else that the Lord Commander might require of you.”
“请问我的职责又是什么？”琼恩尖锐地问，“是不是要帮总司令打理三餐，伺候他更衣，为他打热水洗澡？”
“Do you take me for a servant?”
“没有错。”马尔锡听了琼恩的口气，皱起眉头。“除此之外，你还要替他跑腿，为他房间生火，每天换洗床单和毛毯，以及承担总司令要你做的其他事情。”
“No,” Maester Aemon said, from the back of the sept. Clydas helped him stand. “We took you for a man of Night’s Watch … but perhaps we were wrong in that.”
“你当我是下人么？”
It was all Jon could do to stop himself from walking out. Was he supposed to churn butter and sew doublets like a girl for the rest of his days? “May I go?” he asked stiffly.
“不，”圣堂后方的伊蒙学士说。克莱达斯扶他站起来。“我们当你是守夜人的汉子……不过或许我们错看了你。”
“As you wish,” Bowen Marsh responded.
琼恩竭尽所能地克制自己，方才没有掉头离去。难道他就要像女孩子家一样整天切奶油，缝衣服度过一生？“我可以离开吗？”他僵硬地问。
Dareon and Sam left with him. They descended to the yard in silence. Outside, Jon looked up at the Wall shining in the sun, the melting ice creeping down its side in a hundred thin fingers. Jon’s rage was such that he would have smashed it all in an instant, and the world be damned.
“去罢。”波文·马尔锡回答。
“Jon,” Samwell Tarly said excitedly. “Wait. Don’t you see what they’re doing?”
戴利恩和山姆与他一道离去。他们默默地走回广场，琼恩抬头看着阳光下闪耀的长城，融化的冰水仿如千百根纤细的手指向下流淌。他恼怒至极，恨不得立刻就把整座长城敲个粉碎，管他世界死活。
Jon turned on him in a fury. “I see Ser Alliser’s bloody hand, that’s all I see. He wanted to shame me, and he has.”
“琼恩，”山姆威尔·塔利兴奋地说，“等等我们，你看不出他们的用意吗？”
Dareon gave him a look. “The stewards are fine for the likes of you and me, Sam, but not for Lord Snow.”
琼恩大怒转头。“我只看出这是艾里沙爵士搞的鬼。他想羞辱我，这下他可遂心愿了。”
“I’m a better swordsman and a better rider than any of you,” Jon blazed back. “It’s not fair.”
戴利恩看了他一眼。“山姆，叫你我这种人当当总务不成问题，但雪诺大人厉害着呢。”
“Fair?” Dareon sneered. “The girl was waiting for me, naked as the day she was born. She pulled me through the window, and you talk to me of fair?” He walked off.
“废话，不论使剑、骑马我都比你们行，”琼恩火冒三丈地反击，“这太不公平了！”
“There is no shame in being a steward,” Sam said.
“公平？”戴利恩嗤之以鼻。“当年那小妞脱得精光，活像刚打娘胎里出生一般等着我，还是她把我从窗户里拉进去的。你倒是告诉我什么叫做公平？”
“Do you think I want to spend the rest of my life washing an old man’s smallclothes?”
“当个事务官没什么可耻的。”山姆说。
“The old man is Lord Commander of the Night’s Watch,” Sam reminded him. “You’ll be with him day and night. Yes, you’ll pour his wine and see that his bed linen is fresh, but you’ll also take his letters, attend him at meetings, squire for him in battle. You’ll be as close to him as his shadow. You’ll know everything, be a part of everything … and the Lord Steward said Mormont asked for you himself!
“你要我洗一辈子老头的内衣裤吗？”
“When I was little, my father used to insist that I attend him in the audience chamber whenever he held court. When he rode to Highgarden to bend his knee to Lord Tyrell, he made me come. Later, though, he started to take Dickon and leave me at home, and he no longer cared whether I sat through his audiences, so long as Dickon was there. He wanted his heir at his side, don’t you see? To watch and listen and learn from all he did. I’ll wager that’s why Lord Mormont requested you, Jon. What else could it be? He wants to groom you for command!”
“这老头可是堂堂守夜人军团总司令，”山姆提醒他，“而你则会日夜跟他相处。没错，你是得帮他倒酒，换洗被单，但你也会替他送信，随他参加会议，打仗的时候当他的侍从。你会跟他形影不离，大小事务你都会知情，甚至能施加影响……更何况总务长说是莫尔蒙特别指定要你的！”
Jon was taken aback. It was true, Lord Eddard had often made Robb part of his councils back at Winterfell. Could Sam be right? Even a bastard could rise high in the Night’s Watch, they said. “I never asked for this,” he said stubbornly.
“我小时候，每当父亲开庭理事，总是坚持要我参加；每次他去高庭提利尔大人输诚，也一定带我去。直到后来他改带狄肯，把我丢在家里。只要狄肯跟着他，他便懒得管我是否出席会议。他的目的是把自己的‘继承人’带在身边，你懂吗？让他察言观色从中学习。琼恩，我敢打赌莫尔蒙司令也是这个意思。不然他干嘛这么做？他想训练你作总司令接班人哪！”
“None of us are here for asking,” Sam reminded him.
琼恩完全愣住了。的确，以前在临冬城的时候，艾德公爵便常要罗柏出席各种会议。难道山姆说的是真的？人家总说在守夜人部队里，即便私生子也可升至高位。“我又不想这样。”他嘴硬地说。
And suddenly Jon Snow was ashamed.
“我们没有人想来这里。”山姆又提醒他。
Craven or not, Samwell Tarly had found the courage to accept his fate like a man. On the Wall, a man gets only what he earns , Benjen Stark had said the last night Jon had seen him alive. You’re no ranger, Jon, only a green boy with the smell of summer still on you . He’d heard it said that bastards grow up faster than other children; on the Wall, you grew up or you died.
突然间琼恩·雪诺觉得羞愧交加。
Jon let out a deep sigh. “You have the right of it. I was acting the boy.”
无论他算不算懦夫，山姆威尔·塔利都像个男子汉一样有了接受命运的勇气。在长城守军里，想得到什么样的待遇，就得证明自己有什么样的本事，琼恩最后一次见到活生生的班扬·史塔克的那天夜里，他曾这么说，你还不是游骑兵，你只是个稚气未脱，身上还残留着夏天气味的小鬼。据说私生子成长得比别人都快，在长城上，你若不快快成长，就只有死路一条。
“Then you’ll stay and say your words with me?”
琼恩一声长叹。“你说得没错。是我太孩子气了。”
“The old gods will be expecting us.” He made himself smile.
“那你会留下来跟我一起宣誓啰？”
They set out late that afternoon. The Wall had no gates as such, neither here at Castle Black nor anywhere along its three hundred miles. They led their horses down a narrow tunnel cut through the ice, cold dark walls pressing in around them as the passage twisted and turned. Three times their way was blocked by iron bars, and they had to stop while Bowen Marsh drew out his keys and unlocked the massive chains that secured them. Jon could sense the vast weight pressing down on him as he waited behind the Lord Steward. The air was colder than a tomb, and more still. He felt a strange relief when they reemerged into the afternoon light on the north side of the Wall.
“旧神正在等着我们哪。”他逼自己挤出一丝微笑。
Sam blinked at the sudden glare and looked around apprehensively. “The Wildlings … they wouldn’t … they’d never dare come this close to the Wall. Would they?”
他们于当日下午出发。长城沿线三百里没有一座城门，他们得牵马走进穿透冰层的狭窄隧道。路径曲折蜿蜒，黑暗而冰冷的冰墙无时无刻不向他们逼近。他们经过三道拦路铁栏，每次都得停下脚步，让波文·马尔锡取出大串钥匙，打开锁住栅栏的厚重铁链。等候总务长开门时，琼恩感到无比庞然的重量朝他压来。这里的空气阴冷赛过墓穴，且更为凝滞。等他们终于抵达长城以北，重见午后的阳光，顿时感觉到一股奇异的舒畅。
“They never have.” Jon climbed into his saddle. When Bowen Marsh and their ranger escort had mounted, Jon put two fingers in his mouth and whistled. Ghost came loping out of the tunnel.
面对突如其来的强光，山姆眨眨眼，担忧地环顾四周。“野人……他们不会……他们不敢跑到离长城这么近的地方来，是不是？”
The Lord Steward’s garron whickered and backed away from the direwolf. “Do you mean to take that beast?”
“从来不敢。”琼恩翻身上马。等波文·马尔锡和护送他们的游骑兵都上了马，琼恩把两根手指伸进嘴巴，吹声口哨，白灵从地道里应声奔出。
“Yes, my lord,” Jon said. Ghost’s head lifted. He seemed to taste the air. In the blink of an eye he was off, racing across the broad, weed-choked field to vanish in the trees.
总务长的坐骑嘶叫着退开。“你要带这野兽一起去？”
Once they had entered the forest, they were in a different world. Jon had often hunted with his father and Jory and his brother Robb. He knew the wolfswood around Winterfell as well as any man. The haunted forest was much the same, and yet the feel of it was very different.
“是的，大人。”琼恩说。白灵抬起头，似乎在体验塞外的空气。然后，只一眨眼功夫他便冲了出去，驰骋过野草蔓生的广阔平原，转瞬间消失在远方的树林里。
Perhaps it was all in the knowing. They had ridden past the end of the world; somehow that changed everything. Every shadow seemed darker, every sound more ominous. The trees pressed close and shut out the light of the setting sun. A thin crust of snow cracked beneath the hooves of their horses, with a sound like breaking bones. When the wind set the leaves to rustling, it was like a chilly finger tracing a path up Jon’s spine. The Wall was at their backs, and only the gods knew what lay ahead.
一进森林，他们就恍如置身另一世界。从前琼恩常跟父亲、乔里和罗柏一道外出打猎。对临冬城外的狼林了若指掌。鬼影森林在样貌上大致相同，但却有种极端殊异的氛围。
The sun was sinking below the trees when they reached their destination, a small clearing in the deep of the wood where nine weirwoods grew in a rough circle. Jon drew in a breath, and he saw Sam Tarly staring. Even in the wolfswood, you never found more than two or three of the white trees growing together; a grove of nine was unheard of. The forest floor was carpeted with fallen leaves, bloodred on top, black rot beneath. The wide smooth trunks were bone pale, and nine faces stared inward. The dried sap that crusted in the eyes was red and hard as ruby. Bowen Marsh commanded them to leave their horses outside the circle. “This is a sacred place, we will not defile it.”
这或许就是一种感觉罢。想到已经越过世界的尽头，一切便都不一样了。同样的影子，此地更显阴暗，同样的声音，此地更觉不祥。树与树之间靠得很近，遮蔽了渐落的斜射阳光。地表的薄雪在马蹄下碎裂，声音脆如断骨。朔风吹拂，落叶沙沙作响，像有无数根冰凉手指沿着背脊缓缓而上。长城已在后方，前路一片迷离，诸神才知通往何方。
When they entered the grove, Samwell Tarly turned slowly looking at each face in turn. No two were quite alike. “They’re watching us,” he whispered. “The old gods.”
当他们抵达目的地时，夕阳已没入树梢。这是森林深处的一小块空地，九棵鱼梁木长在一起，粗略组成一个圆。琼恩深吸一口气，抬头发现山姆也睁大了眼睛。即便在北方，即便在狼林，你也找不到这种白色的树会两三棵长在一起，九棵简直闻所未闻。林地铺满落叶，上层血红，下面则是腐朽的黑色。宽而平滑的树干如枯骨般苍白，九张脸向圆心凝视，眼睛部位干涸的树汁红硬宛如宝石。波文·马尔锡命令他们将马匹留在圆圈之外。“这是神圣之地，我们不可亵渎。”
“Yes.” Jon knelt, and Sam knelt beside him.
走进树丛后，山姆威尔·塔利慢慢地转头审视每一张脸。它们全都不一样。“远古诸神，”他悄声说，“他们正看着我们呢。”
They said the words together, as the last light faded in the west and grey day became black night.
“对啊。”琼恩单膝跪下，山姆也跪在他身边。
“Hear my words, and bear witness to my vow,” they recited, their voices filling the twilit grove. “Night gathers, and now my watch begins. It shall not end until my death. I shall take no wife, hold no lands, father no children. I shall wear no crowns and win no glory. I shall live and die at my post. I am the sword in the darkness. I am the watcher on the walls. I am the fire that burns against the cold, the light that brings the dawn, the horn that wakes the sleepers, the shield that guards the realms of men. I pledge my life and honor to the Night’s Watch, for this night and all the nights to come.”
在最后一线日光沉落西天，灰暗的白昼转为黑夜的时刻，他们齐声念出誓言。
The woods fell silent. “You knelt as boys,” Bowen Marsh intoned solemnly. “Rise now as men of the Night’s Watch.”
“倾听我的誓言，做我的见证。”他们的朗诵充斥暮色中的树林，“长夜将至，我从今开始守望，至死方休。我将不娶妻，不封地，不生子。我将不戴宝冠，不争荣宠。我将尽忠职守，生死于斯。我是黑暗中的利剑，长城上的守卫，抵御寒冷的烈焰，破晓时分的光线，唤醒眠者的号角，守护王国的坚盾。我将生命与荣耀献给守夜人，今夜如此，夜夜皆然。”
Jon held out a hand to pull Sam back to his feet. The rangers gathered round to offer smiles and congratulations, all but the gnarled old forester Dywen. “Best we be starting back, m’lord,” he said to Bowen Marsh. “Dark’s falling, and there’s something in the smell o’ the night that I mislike.”
森林一片寂然。“你们跪下时尚为孩童，”波文·马尔锡肃穆地吟诵，“起来吧，守夜人的汉子。”
And suddenly Ghost was back, stalking softly between two weirwoods. White fur and red eyes , Jon realized, disquieted. Like the trees …
琼恩伸手拉山姆起身。随行的游骑兵凑过来微笑恭喜，惟独满脸皱纹的老林务官戴文例外。“大人，咱们最好赶紧上路，”他对波文·马尔锡说，“天黑了，这儿有些味道我不喜欢。”
The wolf had something in his jaws. Something black. “What’s he got there?” asked Bowen Marsh, frowning.
突然，白灵轻步穿过两棵鱼梁木跑了回来。白毛红眼，琼恩不安地想，就像这些树……
“To me, Ghost.” Jon knelt. “Bring it here.”
狼嘴里叼了东西，黑黑的。“他咬了什么？”波文·马尔锡皱眉问。
The direwolf trotted to him. Jon heard Samwell Tarly’s sharp intake of breath.
“白灵，来我这儿。”琼恩单膝跪下。“把东西带过来。”
“Gods be good,” Dywen muttered. “That’s a hand.”
冰原狼快步跑到他身边。琼恩听见山姆威尔·塔利猛抽一口冷气。
*EDDARD
“诸神慈悲，”戴文喃喃地说，“一只手。”
T he grey light of dawn was streaming through his window when the thunder of hoofbeats awoke Eddard Stark from his brief, exhausted sleep. He lifted his head from the table to look down into the yard. Below, men in mail and leather and crimson cloaks were making the morning ring to the sound of swords, and riding down mock warriors stuffed with straw. Ned watched Sandor Clegane gallop across the hard-packed ground to drive an iron-tipped lance through a dummy’s head. Canvas ripped and straw exploded as Lannister guardsmen joked and cursed.
第五十章 艾德
Is this brave show for my benefit, he wondered. If so, Cersei was a greater fool than he’d imagined. Damn her , he thought, why is the woman not fled? I have given her chance after chance …
如雷的蹄声将艾德·史塔克自短暂的浅眠中惊醒，灰色的晨光正透过窗户流泄进屋。他从桌上抬起头，朝楼下的广场望去。全副武装，身着鲜红披风的人正进行着例行的晨间操演，或举剑交击，或骑马砍倒稻草扎成的假人。奈德看到桑铎·克里冈策马飞驰，穿过硬泥土地，举起铁枪刺穿傀儡的头。布块碎裂，稻草飞扬，兰尼斯特家的侍卫在旁谈笑咒骂。
The morning was overcast and grim. Ned broke his fast with his daughters and Septa Mordane. Sansa, still disconsolate, stared sullenly at her food and refused to eat, but Arya wolfed down everything that was set in front of her. “Syrio says we have time for one last lesson before we take ship this evening,” she said. “Can I, Father? All my things are packed.”
这是故意表演给我看的吗？他心想，果真如此，那瑟曦比他想像的还愚昧。该死，这女人为什么不逃走？我一次又一次给她机会……
“A short lesson, and make certain you leave yourself time to bathe and change. I want you ready to leave by midday, is that understood?”
晨色阴霾，多云且沉重。奈德和女儿们及茉丹修女共进早餐。珊莎仍在赌气，拉下脸盯着眼前的食物，一口也不吃。艾莉亚则狼吞虎咽地吃光面前所有东西。“西利欧说晚上搭船前还可以再上一堂课。”她说，“父亲，我可以去吗？我的东西都打包好了。”
“By midday,” Arya said.
“不能太久，还有，记得留时间洗澡换衣服。我希望你中午就准备好，知道吗？”
Sansa looked up from her food. “If she can have a dancing lesson, why won’t you let me say farewell to Prince Joffrey?”
“好。”艾莉亚说。
“I would gladly go with her, Lord Eddard,” Septa Mordane offered. “There would be no question of her missing the ship.”
珊莎将视线从食物上抬起来。“她可以上舞蹈课，为什么不准我去跟乔佛里王子道别？”
“It would not be wise for you to go to Joffrey right now, Sansa. I’m sorry.”
“艾德大人，我很乐意陪她一起去。”茉丹修女提议，“我绝不会让她错过搭船时间。”
Sansa’s eyes filled with tears. “But why?”
“珊莎，现在不适合让你见乔佛里。我很抱歉。”
“Sansa, your lord father knows best,” Septa Mordane said. “You are not to question his decisions.”
珊莎泪眼汪汪。“为什么不适合？”
“It’s not fair!” Sansa pushed back from her table, knocked over her chair, and ran weeping from the solar.
“珊莎，你父亲知道怎么做最好，”茉丹修女说，“你不该怀疑他的决定。”
Septa Mordane rose, but Ned gestured her back to her seat. “Let her go, Septa. I will try to make her understand when we are all safely back in Winterfell.” The septa bowed her head and sat down to finish her breakfast.
“这太不公平了！”珊莎向后一推，弄倒椅子，哭哭啼啼地逃离书房。
It was an hour later when Grand Maester Pycelle came to Eddard Stark in his solar. His shoulders slumped, as if the weight of the great maester’s chain around his neck had become too great to bear. “My lord,” he said, “King Robert is gone. The gods give him rest.”
茉丹修女起身，但奈德举手示意她坐下。“修女，让她去吧。有朝一日，等我们全体都安然返回临冬城，我再跟她解释。”修女点点头，坐下继续吃早餐。
“No,” Ned answered. “He hated rest. The gods give him love and laughter, and the joy of righteous battle.” It was strange how empty he felt. He had been expecting the visit, and yet with those words, something died within him. He would have given all his titles for the freedom to weep … but he was Robert’s Hand, and the hour he dreaded had come. “Be so good as to summon the members of the council here to my solar,” he told Pycelle. The Tower of the Hand was as secure as he and Tomard could make it; he could not say the same for the council chambers.
一小时后，派席尔国师走进艾德·史塔克的书房。他驼着背，仿佛脖子上的链令他不堪重负。“大人，”他说，“劳勃国王陛下走了。愿天上诸神让他安息。”
“My lord?” Pycelle blinked. “Surely the affairs of the kingdom will keep till the morrow, when our grief is not so fresh.”
“不，”奈德回答，“他最讨厌休息，愿诸神赐他爱与欢笑，以及为正义而战的喜悦。”他只感觉好生沉重。明知迟早会有这一刻，然而当实际听到这些话语，心中的某些部分依然随之死去。他愿用所有的头衔换取哭泣的自由……但他是劳勃的首相，而他所畏惧的时刻已经来临。“有劳您把朝廷重臣都请到我书房来。”他告诉派席尔。他和托马德已经尽可能地确保首相塔安全无虞，换做议事厅他就不敢担保了。
Ned was quiet but firm. “I fear we must convene at once.”
“大人，这样好吗？”派席尔眨眨眼，“是不是等明天我们不那么难过了，再来共商大计？”
Pycelle bowed. “As the Hand commands.” He called his servants and sent them running, then gratefully accepted Ned’s offer of a chair and a cup of sweet beer.
奈德语气平静而坚决。“恐怕我们必须现在就开会。”
Ser Barristan Selmy was the first to answer the summons, immaculate in white cloak and enameled scales. “My lords,” he said, “my place is beside the young king now. Pray give me leave to attend him.”
派席尔鞠躬，“谨遵首相吩咐。”他召来仆人，遣他们快步跑去，自己则感激地接受奈德的椅子和一杯甜啤酒。
“Your place is here, Ser Barristan,” Ned told him.
巴利斯坦·赛尔弥率先抵达，一身雪白披风，雕花铠甲，十足洁白无瑕模样。“两位大人，”他说，“如今我的职责所在是守护年轻的国王，请让我去服侍他。”
Littlefinger came next, still garbed in the blue velvets and silver mockingbird cape he had worn the night previous, his boots dusty from riding. “My lords,” he said, smiling at nothing in particular before he turned to Ned. “That little task you set me is accomplished, Lord Eddard.”
“巴利斯坦爵士，你的职责所在是这里。”奈德告诉他。
Varys entered in a wash of lavender, pink from his bath, his plump face scrubbed and freshly powdered, his soft slippers all but soundless. “The little birds sing a grievous song today,” he said as he seated himself. “The realm weeps. Shall we begin?”
第二个来的是小指头，依旧穿着昨晚那套蓝天鹅绒和灰仿声鸟斗篷，靴子上沾了骑马的尘土。“诸位大人好，”他泛泛地作个微笑，然后转向奈德。“艾德大人，您要我办的那件小事已经妥了。”
“When Lord Renly arrives,” Ned said.
瓦里斯浑身薰衣草味地进来，他刚洗过澡，胖脸刷洗干净又新扑过粉，脚下的软拖鞋轻柔无声。“今儿个小小鸟儿唱着悲伤的歌谣，”他边坐下边说，“举国都在哭泣。让我们开始吧？”
Varys gave him a sorrowful look. “I fear Lord Renly has left the city.”
“先等蓝礼大人。”奈德说。
“Left the city?” Ned had counted on Renly’s support.
瓦里斯哀怨地看了他一眼。“恐怕蓝礼大人已经出城了。”
“He took his leave through a postern gate an hour before dawn, accompanied by Ser Loras Tyrell and some fifty retainers,” Varys told them. “When last seen, they were galloping south in some haste, no doubt bound for Storm’s End or Highgarden.”
“出城了？”奈德本寄望蓝礼支持他。
So much for Renly and his hundred swords . Ned did not like the smell of that, but there was nothing to be done for it. He drew out Robert’s last letter. “The king called me to his side last night and commanded me to record his final words. Lord Renly and Grand Maester Pycelle stood witness as Robert sealed the letter, to be opened by the council after his death. Ser Barristan, if you would be so kind?”
“天亮前一个小时左右，他自侧门离开，随他一起走的还有洛拉斯·提利尔爵士和五十名随从。”瓦里斯告诉他们，“据最新情报，他们正快马加鞭往南赶，无疑是奔风息堡或高庭而去。”
The Lord Commander of the Kingsguard examined the paper. “King Robert’s seal, and unbroken.” He opened the letter and read. “Lord Eddard Stark is herein named Protector of the Realm, to rule as regent until the heir comes of age.”
好个蓝礼的一百士兵。这情形虽对奈德不利，却也无可奈何。他抽出劳勃的遗嘱。“昨晚国王召我到他身边，命令我记下他的遗言。劳勃盖下御印时，蓝礼大人和派席尔大学士都在现场作证。这封信该等国王陛下死后由御前会议开启。巴利斯坦爵士，可否劳您检查一番？”
And as it happens, he is of age , Ned reflected, but he did not give voice to the thought. He trusted neither Pycelle nor Varys, and Ser Barristan was honor-bound to protect and defend the boy he thought his new king. The old knight would not abandon Joffrey easily. The need for deceit was a bitter taste in his mouth, but Ned knew he must tread softly here, must keep his counsel and play the game until he was firmly established as regent. There would be time enough to deal with the succession when Arya and Sansa were safely back in Winterfell, and Lord Stannis had returned to King’s Landing with all his power.
御林铁卫队长仔细检视那张纸。“这确是劳勃国王的印信，并未经拆封。”他打开信读出来。“……史塔克家族的艾德为摄政王及全境守护者，代余统理国事，俟吾之合法继承人成年为止。”
“I would ask this council to confirm me as Lord Protector, as Robert wished,” Ned said, watching their faces, wondering what thoughts hid behind Pycelle’s half-closed eyes, Littlefinger’s lazy half-smile, and the nervous flutter of Varys’s fingers.
事实上，这个继承人早就成年了。奈德心想，但没说出口。他不信任派席尔和瓦里斯，巴利斯坦爵士则认定那男孩是新国王，出于荣誉执意要保护他。这老骑士只怕不会轻易放弃乔佛里。虽然用欺骗的方式为他所不愿，但奈德很清楚自己必须步步为营，先不动声色地继续从前的游戏，静待他摄政王的地位逐渐巩固。等艾莉亚和珊莎平安返回临冬城，史坦尼斯公爵也带着军队进驻君临，再来好好解决继承权的问题不迟。
The door opened. Fat Tom stepped into the solar. “Pardon, my lords, the king’s steward insists …”
“我要请诸位依照劳勃遗愿，确认我摄政王的身份。”奈德边说边看众人的脸，揣测派席尔那双半阖上的眼睛，小指头慵懒的浅笑和瓦里斯焦虑抖动的手指背后，隐藏的是什么样的想法。
The royal steward entered and bowed. “Esteemed lords, the king demands the immediate presence of his small council in the throne room.”
门突然打开。胖汤姆走进书房。“诸位大人，请见谅，国王的总管坚持……”
Ned had expected Cersei to strike quickly; the summons came as no surprise. “The king is dead,” he said, “but we shall go with you nonetheless. Tom, assemble an escort, if you would.”
御前总管进来鞠躬道：“各位可敬的大人，国王要求立刻在王座厅召开御前会议。”
Littlefinger gave Ned his arm to help him down the steps. Varys, Pycelle, and Ser Barristan followed close behind. A double column of men-at-arms in chainmail and steel helms was waiting outside the tower, eight strong. Grey cloaks snapped in the wind as the guardsmen marched them across the yard. There was no Lannister crimson to be seen, but Ned was reassured by the number of gold cloaks visible on the ramparts and at the gates.
奈德早料到瑟曦会抢先下手，因此这次召见他丝毫不感意外。“国王已死。”他说，“但我们还是跟你去。汤姆，请你安排护送。”
Janos Slynt met them at the door to the throne room, armored in ornate black-and-gold plate, with a high-crested helm under one arm. The Commander bowed stiffly. His men pushed open the great oaken doors, twenty feet tall and banded with bronze.
小指头伸手搀扶奈德走下台阶。瓦里斯，派席尔和巴利斯坦爵士紧跟在后。身穿锁甲，头戴钢盔的临冬城卫士成两列纵队等在高塔外，一共八人。卫士护送他们穿过广场，灰色披风在风中啪啪作响。四下虽不见兰尼斯特的鲜红，却有不少金色披风的都城守卫在城墙上和大门边巡逻，令奈德稍觉安心。
The royal steward led them in. “All hail His Grace, Joffrey of the Houses Baratheon and Lannister, the First of his Name, King of the Andals and the Rhoynar and the First Men, Lord of the Seven Kingdoms and Protector of the Realm,” he sang out.
杰诺斯·史林特在大厅门口迎接，他穿着一件雕饰华丽的黑金铠甲，腋下夹着一顶高羽头盔。都城守卫司令僵硬地点个头，他的部下便推开足有二十尺高、镶青铜边的橡木大门。
It was a long walk to the far end of the hall, where Joffrey waited atop the Iron Throne. Supported by Littlefinger, Ned Stark slowly limped and hopped toward the boy who called himself king. The others followed. The first time he had come this way, he had been on horseback, sword in hand, and the Targaryen dragons had watched from the walls as he forced Jaime Lannister down from the throne. He wondered if Joffrey would step down quite so easily.
御前总管领他们进去。“恭迎安达尔人、洛伊拿人和先民的国王，七国统治者暨全境守护者，拜拉席恩家族与兰尼斯特家族的乔佛里一世陛下。”他朗声唱诵。
Five knights of the Kingsguard—all but Ser Jaime and Ser Barristan—were arrayed in a crescent around the base of the throne. They were in full armor, enameled steel from helm to heel, long pale cloaks over their shoulders, shining white shields strapped to their left arms. Cersei Lannister and her two younger children stood behind Ser Boros and Ser Meryn. The queen wore a gown of sea-green silk, trimmed with Myrish lace as pale as foam. On her finger was a golden ring with an emerald the size of a pigeon’s egg, on her head a matching tiara.
离大厅另一头还有段漫长的路，乔佛里正坐在铁王座上等他。在小指头的搀扶之下，奈德·史塔克一跛一跛地缓步朝那个自命为王的男孩走去，其他人紧随在后。他头一次走上这条路，乃是身骑骏马，手持利剑，逼迫詹姆·兰尼斯特走下王座，坦格利安的龙头则从四面墙壁上冷眼旁观。他不知乔佛里是否也会那么听话地放弃王位。
Above them, Prince Joffrey sat amidst the barbs and spikes in a cloth-of-gold doublet and a red satin cape. Sandor Clegane was stationed at the foot of the throne’s steep narrow stair. He wore mail and soot-grey plate and his snarling dog’s-head helm.
五名御林铁卫——除开詹姆爵士和巴利斯坦爵士——全部到场，呈新月形围绕着王座底部。他们全副武装，从头到脚披挂着精美的铠甲头盔，长长的白披风抖在身后，闪亮的白盾牌绑上左臂。瑟曦·兰尼斯特和她两个年纪较小的孩子站在柏洛斯爵士和马林爵士后面。王后穿了一袭海绿色丝质长袍，边上绣了白如浪花的密尔蕾丝。手上带了一枚镶有鸽子蛋那么大翡翠的金戒指，头上还有一顶式样相称的金头环。
Behind the throne, twenty Lannister guardsmen waited with longswords hanging from their belts. Crimson cloaks draped their shoulders and steel lions crested their helms. But Littlefinger had kept his promise; all along the walls, in front of Robert’s tapestries with their scenes of hunt and battle, the gold-cloaked ranks of the City Watch stood stiffly to attention, each man’s hand clasped around the haft of an eight-foot-long spear tipped in black iron. They outnumbered the Lannisters five to one.
在他们上方密布尖刺的椅子里，坐了穿着金线外衣，红缎披风的乔佛里。桑铎·克里冈站在王座陡峭而狭窄的楼梯口。他身穿烟灰色的铠甲，戴着那顶狰狞狗头盔。
Ned’s leg was a blaze of pain by the time he stopped. He kept a hand on Littlefinger’s shoulder to help support his weight.
王座后方，有二十名腰悬长剑的兰尼斯特卫士。他们肩膀悬挂鲜红披风，头上顶着雄狮钢盔。但小指头果然信守诺言：在两侧墙边，在劳勃那些描绘狩猎和战争的壁毯下，挺立着金披风的都城守卫队，他们每个人手里都紧握着黑铁枪尖的八尺长矛，做好了一切准备，人数则足足是兰尼斯特士兵的五倍。
Joffrey stood. His red satin cape was patterned in gold thread; fifty roaring lions to one side, fifty prancing stags to the other. “I command the council to make all the necessary arrangements for my coronation,” the boy proclaimed. “I wish to be crowned within the fortnight. Today I shall accept oaths of fealty from my loyal councillors.”
当奈德停下脚步，他的断腿已经痛得难以忍受，只好一手搭着小指头的肩膀稳住身子。
Ned produced Robert’s letter. “Lord Varys, be so kind as to show this to my lady of Lannister.”
乔佛里站起来。他的红缎披风绣了金线，一边是五十只怒吼雄狮，另一边则是五十只跳跃公鹿。“我命令御前会议全速准备我的加冕仪式，”男孩宣布，“我希望在两周内完成加冕。今天我要接受朝廷重臣的宣誓效命。”
The eunuch carried the letter to Cersei. The queen glanced at the words. “Protector of the Realm,” she read. “Is this meant to be your shield, my lord? A piece of paper?” She ripped the letter in half, ripped the halves in quarters, and let the pieces flutter to the floor.
奈德取出劳勃的信。“瓦里斯大人，有劳您将这封信拿给兰尼斯特家族的夫人。”
“Those were the king’s words,” Ser Barristan said, shocked.
太监把信递给瑟曦，王后瞄了一眼。“全境守护者，”她念道，“大人，您想拿这当挡箭牌吗？就区区一张纸？”她将纸撕成两半，再撕成四片，碎片散落一地。
“We have a new king now,” Cersei Lannister replied. “Lord Eddard, when last we spoke, you gave me some counsel. Allow me to return the courtesy. Bend the knee, my lord. Bend the knee and swear fealty to my son, and we shall allow you to step down as Hand and live out your days in the grey waste you call home.”
“那是国王的遗嘱啊。”巴利斯坦爵士骇然。
“Would that I could,” Ned said grimly. If she was so determined to force the issue here and now, she left him no choice. “Your son has no claim to the throne he sits. Lord Stannis is Robert’s true heir.”
“我们有了新国王。”瑟曦·兰尼斯特说，“艾德大人，上次我们见面，您给了我一些建议，现在让我也回个礼。跪下，大人。只要您下跪宣誓效忠我儿子，我们就准许您卸下首相职务，回到那片您称之为家的灰色荒原安享晚年。”
“Liar!” Joffrey screamed, his face reddening.
“我倒期望如此。”奈德冷冷地说。既然她执意在此时此地做个了断，那他别无选择。“但你儿子无权继承王位。史坦尼斯大人才是劳勃合法的继承人。”
“Mother, what does he mean?” Princess Myrcella asked the queen plaintively. “Isn’t Joff the king now?”
“你骗人！”乔佛里满脸通红地尖叫。
“You condemn yourself with your own mouth, Lord Stark,” said Cersei Lannister. “Ser Barristan, seize this traitor.”
“母亲，他这话什么意思？”弥赛拉公主一脸哀怨地问王后。“小乔现在不是国王了吗？”
The Lord Commander of the Kingsguard hesitated. In the blink of an eye he was surrounded by Stark guardsmen, bare steel in their mailed fists.
“史塔克大人，你这是自寻死路。”瑟曦·兰尼斯特道，“巴利斯坦爵士，拿下这个叛徒。”
“And now the treason moves from words to deeds,” Cersei said. “Do you think Ser Barristan stands alone, my lord?” With an ominous rasp of metal on metal, the Hound drew his longsword. The knights of the Kingsguard and twenty Lannister guardsmen in crimson cloaks moved to support him.
御林铁卫队长迟疑了片刻，只一眨眼功夫，他便被拔出武器的史塔克卫士团团围住。
“Kill him!” the boy king screamed down from the Iron Throne. “Kill all of them, I command it!”
“我看你不只是嘴上说说，而是迫不及待要抢位夺权了。”瑟曦道，“大人，你以为巴利斯坦爵士孤军奋战吗？”随着一声充满不祥暗示的金属碰撞，猎狗抽出了长剑。其余的御林铁卫和二十名兰尼斯特卫士也同时前进。
“You leave me no choice,” Ned told Cersei Lannister. He called out to Janos Slynt. “Commander, take the queen and her children into custody. Do them no harm, but escort them back to the royal apartments and keep them there, under guard.”
“杀了他！”铁王座上的男孩国王扯着喉咙尖叫，“把他们通通给我杀掉！”
“Men of the Watch!” Janos Slynt shouted, donning his helm. A hundred gold cloaks leveled their spears and closed.
“你让我别无选择。”奈德告诉瑟曦·兰尼斯特。他召唤杰诺斯·史林特，“司令，请您暂时拘捕王后和她的孩子，但不得加以伤害。将他们送回王家居室，并派人加以看守。”
“I want no bloodshed,” Ned told the queen. “Tell your men to lay down their swords, and no one need—”
“都城守卫队！”杰诺斯·史林特高叫，一边戴上头盔。一百名金披风卫士放低长枪，朝他们靠拢。
With a single sharp thrust, the nearest gold cloak drove his spear into Tomard’s back. Fat Tom’s blade dropped from nerveless fingers as the wet red point burst out through his ribs, piercing leather and mail. He was dead before his sword hit the floor.
“我不希望无谓的流血冲突，”奈德告诉王后，“叫你的手下放下武器，就无须——”
Ned’s shout came far too late. Janos Slynt himself slashed open Varly’s throat. Cayn whirled, steel flashing, drove back the nearest spearman with a flurry of blows; for an instant it looked as though he might cut his way free. Then the Hound was on him. Sandor Clegane’s first cut took off Cayn’s sword hand at the wrist; his second drove him to his knees and opened him from shoulder to breastbone.
一记利落的突刺，离得最近的都城守卫将长枪戳进托马德的背脊。胖汤姆的剑从绵软无力的手中滑落，鲜血淋漓的枪尖自肋骨下刺出，穿透皮革背心和盔甲。剑未落地，人已丧命。
As his men died around him, Littlefinger slid Ned’s dagger from its sheath and shoved it up under his chin. His smile was apologetic. “I did warn you not to trust me, you know.”
奈德的叫喊来得太迟。史林特亲自斩开瓦利的咽喉。凯恩旋身挥剑，绽起一片剑光，逼退身旁的枪兵。刹那间他仿佛就要突围而出，这时却来了猎狗。桑铎·克里冈第一剑砍断凯恩的右手腕，第二剑将他从肩膀至胸骨活活劈开。凯恩当场气绝身亡。
*ARYA
眼看手下一个个在身边死去，小指头从奈德腰际抽出匕首，顶住他的下巴。他的微笑充满歉意。“我不是警告你别信任我的嘛。”
“H igh,” Syrio Forel called out, slashing at her head. The stick swords clacked as Arya parried. “Left,” he shouted, and his blade came whistling. Hers darted to meet it. The clack made him click his teeth together.
第五十一章 艾莉亚
“Right,” he said, and “Low,” and “Left,” and “Left” again, faster and faster, moving forward. Arya retreated before him, checking each blow.
“上。”西利欧·佛瑞尔叫喊着，朝她头部挥去。艾莉亚举剑挡格，木剑相交，喀的一声。
“Lunge,” he warned, and when he thrust she sidestepped, swept his blade away, and slashed at his shoulder. She almost touched him, almost , so close it made her grin. A strand of hair dangled in her eyes, limp with sweat. She pushed it away with the back of her hand.
“左。”他又叫，木剑随即呼啸而出。她的剑也急速迎去。又是喀的一声，她咬紧牙关。
“Left,” Syrio sang out. “Low.” His sword was a blur, and the Small Hall echoed to the clack clack clack . “Left. Left. High. Left. Right. Left. Low. Left!”
“右，”他说，之后是“下”、“左”、“左”，越来越快，向前步步进逼。艾莉亚则不断后退，挥开每一记攻势。
The wooden blade caught her high in the breast, a sudden stinging blow that hurt all the more because it came from the wrong side. “Ow,” she cried out. She would have a fresh bruise there by the time she went to sleep, somewhere out at sea. A bruise is a lesson , she told herself, and each lesson makes us better .
“开始冲锋了。”他警告。于是当他向前猛攻，她往旁边一闪，扫开他的剑，朝他肩膀砍去。她差一点就碰到他了，就差那么一点点，她禁不住得意地笑起来。一撮淌着汗水的头发垂下，在她眼前晃来晃去，她用手背拨开。
Syrio stepped back. “You are dead now.”
“左。”西利欧叫道。“下。”他的剑快得看不清，喀喀声响彻小厅。“左，左，上，左，右，左，下，左！”
Arya made a face. “You cheated,” she said hotly. “You said left and you went right.”
这一剑刺得很高，正中她的胸膛。她剧痛难忍，因为这次攻击方向全然不对，打了她一个措手不及。“哎哟！”她叫道。看来，等今晚在海上某个地方睡觉的时候，胸部大概已经淤青一片了。每次受伤都是一次教训，她告诉自己，而每次教训都让我们更强。
“Just so. And now you are a dead girl.”
西利欧后退。“你已经死了。”
“But you lied!”
艾莉亚扮起鬼脸。“你作弊啦，”她气冲冲地说，“你明明说左边结果却打右边。”
“My words lied. My eyes and my arm shouted out the truth, but you were not seeing.”
“就是这样，你从此就是个死女孩了。”
“I was so,” Arya said. “I watched you every second!”
“可你‘骗人’啊！”
“Watching is not seeing, dead girl. The water dancer sees. Come, put down the sword, it is time for listening now.”
“我的嘴巴骗人，我的眼睛和手说的可是真话，只是你视而不见。”
She followed him over to the wall, where he settled onto a bench. “Syrio Forel was first sword to the Sealord of Braavos, and are you knowing how that came to pass?”
“我哪里看不见，”艾莉亚说，“我每秒钟都盯着你看！”
“You were the finest swordsman in the city.”
“死掉的小妹妹，‘观看’不代表‘洞察’。水舞者一定要能洞察。来，把剑放下，听课的时候到了。”
“Just so, but why? Other men were stronger, faster, younger, why was Syrio Forel the best? I will tell you now.” He touched the tip of his little finger lightly to his eyelid. “The seeing, the true seeing, that is the heart of it.
她跟着他走到墙边，他在板凳上坐下。“西利欧·佛瑞尔能当上布拉佛斯海王的首席剑士，你知道凭什么吗？”
“Hear me. The ships of Braavos sail as far as the winds blow, to lands strange and wonderful, and when they return their captains fetch queer animals to the Sealord’s menagerie. Such animals as you have never seen, striped horses, great spotted things with necks as long as stilts, hairy mouse-pigs as big as cows, stinging manticores, tigers that carry their cubs in a pouch, terrible walking lizards with scythes for claws. Syrio Forel has seen these things.
“因为你是全城最厉害的剑客。”
“On the day I am speaking of, the first sword was newly dead, and the Sealord sent for me. Many bravos had come to him, and as many had been sent away, none could say why. When I came into his presence, he was seated, and in his lap was a fat yellow cat. He told me that one of his captains had brought the beast to him, from an island beyond the sunrise. ‘Have you ever seen her like?’ he asked of me.
“就是这样，但为什么是我？有很多人比我强壮，比我敏捷，比我年轻，为什么是西利欧·佛瑞尔最厉害？现在让我来告诉你。”他用指尖轻轻碰了碰睫毛。“诀窍在于洞察，洞察事物的真相。”
“And to him I said, ‘Each night in the alleys of Braavos I see a thousand like him,’ and the Sealord laughed, and that day I was named the first sword.”
“听着。海风吹到何方，布拉佛斯的船就开往何地。他们去过很多稀奇古怪的地方，每次返航，船长都会为海王的百兽园献上远方的动物。那是你从未见过的各式珍禽异兽，比如有条纹的马，全身长满斑点、脖子像高跷一样长的东西，还有浑身是毛、长得跟母牛一样大的鼠猪，会螫人的狮身蝎尾兽，把幼兽装在袋子里的老虎，还有走来走去、有镰刀般的爪子的恐怖蜥蜴。这些东西西利欧·佛瑞尔通通都见过。”
Arya screwed up her face. “I don’t understand.”
“我说的那天，前任首席剑士刚刚去世，海王便传我过去，只因按照布拉佛斯的传统必须立刻选择继承人。之前已有不少杀手去见过他，结果通通都被遣走，谁也说不出原因。我进去的时候，他安详地坐着，膝上躺了一只肥胖的黄猫，他告诉我：这是他手下某位船长从比日出之地更远的小岛上带回来给他的。‘你没见过像她这样的动物吧？’他问我。”
Syrio clicked his teeth together. “The cat was an ordinary cat, no more. The others expected a fabulous beast, so that is what they saw. How large it was, they said. It was no larger than any other cat, only fat from indolence, for the Sealord fed it from his own table. What curious small ears, they said. Its ears had been chewed away in kitten fights. And it was plainly a tomcat, yet the Sealord said ‘her,’ and that is what the others saw. Are you hearing?”
“而我对他说：‘每晚我在布拉佛斯的小巷都见到几千只他这种动物。’海王听了抚掌大笑，当日就任命我为首席剑士。”
Arya thought about it. “You saw what was there.”
艾莉亚露出一张苦脸。“我不懂。”
“Just so. Opening your eyes is all that is needing. The heart lies and the head plays tricks with us, but the eyes see true. Look with your eyes. Hear with your ears. Taste with your mouth. Smell with your nose. Feel with your skin. Then comes the thinking, afterward, and in that way knowing the truth.”
西利欧把牙齿磨得咯咯作响。“那只是一只平凡无奇的猫。其他人以为会看到珍禽异兽，所以他们眼中就只看得到珍禽异兽。他们说这只猫很大，可那只猫并不特别大，只不过因为好吃懒做，海王又常拿自己餐桌上的东西喂它，所以才稍微发福。他们又说它耳朵小巧玲珑，其实只是因为和其他猫打架的时候被咬掉了一块。那明明就是只公猫，但海王开口说‘她’，他们也就信以为真。你听懂了吗？”
“Just so,” said Arya, grinning.
艾莉亚仔细想想。“你洞察了事情的真相。”
Syrio Forel allowed himself a smile. “I am thinking that when we are reaching this Winterfell of yours, it will be time to put this needle in your hand.”
“就是这样。最重要的就是睁大眼睛。心会说谎，头脑会愚弄我们，只有眼睛雪亮。用你的眼睛看，用你的耳朵听，用你的嘴巴尝，用你的鼻子闻，用你的皮肤去感觉，最后才用脑袋去想，这样才会洞察真相。”
“Yes!” Arya said eagerly. “Wait till I show Jon—”
“就是这样。”艾莉亚嘻嘻笑道。
Behind her the great wooden doors of the Small Hall flew open with a resounding crash. Arya whirled.
西利欧·佛瑞尔难得地露出微笑。“我在想，等我们抵达你家那个临冬城，也差不多是该让你使用这把缝衣针的时候了。”
A knight of the Kingsguard stood beneath the arch of the door with five Lannister guardsmen arrayed behind him. He was in full armor, but his visor was up. Arya remembered his droopy eyes and rust-colored whiskers from when he had come to Winterfell with the king: Ser Meryn Trant. The red cloaks wore mail shirts over boiled leather and steel caps with lion crests. “Arya Stark,” the knight said, “come with us, child.”
“太棒了！”艾莉亚迫不及待地说，“到时候我让琼恩看——”
Arya chewed her lip uncertainly. “What do you want?”
轰的一声，身后的小厅大木门被人撞开，艾莉亚立刻旋身。
“Your father wants to see you.”
一名御林铁卫站在门拱下，身后跟了五个兰尼斯特卫士。他全副武装，只把头盔的面罩打开。此人陪国王来临冬城作客时，艾莉亚见过他，记得他那低垂的眼睛和铁锈色的小胡子，这必是马林·特兰爵士无疑。红披风的侍卫穿着皮革背心和锁甲，头戴雄狮钢盔。“艾莉亚·史塔克，”骑士说，“孩子，跟我们走。”
Arya took a step forward, but Syrio Forel held her by the arm. “And why is it that Lord Eddard is sending Lannister men in the place of his own? I am wondering.”
艾莉亚犹豫不决地噘起嘴。“你们找我做什么？”
“Mind your place, dancing master,” Ser Meryn said. “This is no concern of yours.”
“你父亲要见你。”
“My father wouldn’t send you,” Arya said. She snatched up her stick sword. The Lannisters laughed.
艾莉亚向前走了一步，但西利欧·佛利尔握住她的手。“艾德大人为何不派他的手下，反而派兰尼斯特家的人来呢？我很好奇。”
“Put down the stick, girl,” Ser Meryn told her. “I am a Sworn Brother of the Kingsguard, the White Swords.”
“舞蹈老师，别不识好歹，”马林爵士说，“此事与你无关。”
“So was the Kingslayer when he killed the old king,” Arya said. “I don’t have to go with you if I don’t want.”
“我父亲才不会派你们来呢。”艾莉亚说着举起她的木剑。兰尼斯特侍卫见了哈哈大笑。
Ser Meryn Trant ran out of patience. “Take her,” he said to his men. He lowered the visor of his helm.
“小妹妹乖，把棍子放下，”马林爵士告诉她，“我乃御林铁卫众弟兄的一员，是宣誓效命的白骑士。”
Three of them started forward, chainmail clinking softly with each step. Arya was suddenly afraid. Fear cuts deeper than swords , she told herself, to slow the racing of her heart.
“杀老国王的弑君者也是啊。”艾莉亚说，“我不想去，我不想跟你走。”
Syrio Forel stepped between them, tapping his wooden sword lightly against his boot. “You will be stopping there. Are you men or dogs that you would threaten a child?”
马林·特兰爵士没了耐性。“抓住她。”他对手下说，然后放下面罩。
“Out of the way, old man,” one of the red cloaks said.
三个卫士向前走来，锁子甲随着跨出的每一步发出清脆的碰撞。艾莉亚突然害怕起来。恐惧比利剑更伤人，她告诉自己，慢慢缓和狂乱的心跳。
Syrio’s stick came whistling up and rang against his helm. “I am Syrio Forel, and you will now be speaking to me with more respect.”
西利欧·佛瑞尔走上前来，挡在中间，边拿木剑轻敲靴子。“到此为止。你们是人还是狗，居然有脸威胁小孩子？”
“Bald bastard.” The man yanked free his longsword. The stick moved again, blindingly fast. Arya heard a loud crack as the sword went clattering to the stone floor. “My hand,” the guardsman yelped, cradling his broken fingers.
“滚开，老头子。”一名红袍侍卫叫道。
“You are quick, for a dancing master,” said Ser Meryn.
西利欧的木棍咻地一声上窜，敲了那人头盔一下。“我是西利欧·佛瑞尔，从现在开始，你跟我讲话要放尊重点。”
“You are slow, for a knight,” Syrio replied.
“秃头浑球。”来人拔出长剑。木棍再度窜动，快得刺眼。艾莉亚只听喀啦一声，钢剑已掉在石地板上。“我的手。”那名守卫惨叫着握住断掉的手指。
“Kill the Braavosi and bring me the girl,” the knight in the white armor commanded.
“以一个舞蹈老师来说，你挺快。”马林爵士评价。
Four Lannister guardsmen unsheathed their swords. The fifth, with the broken fingers, spat and pulled free a dagger with his left hand.
“以一个骑士而言，你太慢。”西利欧回敬。
Syrio Forel clicked his teeth together, sliding into his water dancer’s stance, presenting only his side to the foe. “Arya child,” he called out, never looking, never taking his eyes off the Lannisters, “we are done with dancing for the day. Best you are going now. Run to your father.”
“宰了这布拉佛斯人，把那小女孩抓来。”白甲骑士命令。
Arya did not want to leave him, but he had taught her to do as he said. “Swift as a deer,” she whispered.
四个兰尼斯特士兵纷纷抽出佩剑，断指的那个啐了口唾沫，用左手拔出匕首。
“Just so,” said Syrio Forel as the Lannisters closed.
西利欧·佛瑞尔喀喀咬紧牙齿，滑出水舞者的姿势，侧面迎敌。“小艾莉亚，”他叫道，但他看都没看她一眼，自始至终没将视线自兰尼斯特卫兵身上移开。“今天的舞蹈课到此为止。你最好快走，跑步去找你父亲。”
Arya retreated, her own sword stick clutched tightly in her hand. Watching him now, she realized that Syrio had only been toying with her when they dueled. The red cloaks came at him from three sides with steel in their hands. They had chainmail over their chest and arms, and steel codpieces sewn into their pants, but only leather on their legs. Their hands were bare, and the caps they wore had noseguards, but no visor over the eyes.
艾莉亚不想抛下他，但他教导她要听话。“疾如鹿。”她小声说。
Syrio did not wait for them to reach him, but spun to his left. Arya had never seen a man move as fast. He checked one sword with his stick and whirled away from a second. Off balance, the second man lurched into the first. Syrio put a boot to his back and the red cloaks went down together. The third guard came leaping over them, slashing at the water dancer’s head. Syrio ducked under his blade and thrust upward. The guardsman fell screaming as blood welled from the wet red hole where his left eye had been.
“就是这样。”西利欧·佛瑞尔说。兰尼斯特士兵向他围去。
The fallen men were getting up. Syrio kicked one in the face and snatched the steel cap off the other’s head. The dagger man stabbed at him. Syrio caught the thrust in the helmet and shattered the man’s kneecap with his stick. The last red cloak shouted a curse and charged, hacking down with both hands on his sword. Syrio rolled right, and the butcher’s cut caught the helmetless man between neck and shoulder as he struggled to his knees. The longsword crunched through mail and leather and flesh. The man on his knees shrieked. Before his killer could wrench free his blade, Syrio jabbed him in the apple of his throat. The guardsman gave a choked cry and staggered back, clutching at his neck, his face blackening.
艾莉亚缓缓后退，手里紧紧握着木剑。看着西利欧应战的架式，她才明白平日和她交手时，他不过随意玩玩罢了。红袍武士握着钢剑从三面向他进逼，他们的胸膛和手臂受锁甲保护，短裤缝了金属护膝，但脚上只有皮革绑腿，双手暴露在外。他们的头盔虽有护鼻，却没有面罩遮眼。
Five men were down, dead, or dying by the time Arya reached the back door that opened on the kitchen. She heard Ser Meryn Trant curse. “Bloody oafs,” he swore, drawing his longsword from its scabbard.
西利欧不等他们靠近，便闪身向左。艾莉亚不敢想象人的动作竟能那么快。他用木棍挡住一把剑，旋身躲过第二把。第二个人失去重心，踉跄着朝先前那人跌去。西利欧朝他后背补上一脚，两个红袍武士摔成一团。第三个卫士跳过他们冲来，挥剑往水舞者的头砍去。西利欧身子一低，向上疾刺。那名守卫惨叫倒地，本来是左眼的地方，如今只剩一个血淋淋的窟窿。
Syrio Forel resumed his stance and clicked his teeth together. “Arya child,” he called out, never looking at her, “be gone now.”
摔倒的人准备爬起。西利欧踢中一人的面门，扯下男一人的头盔。拿匕首的人朝他猛刺，西利欧用头盔接住他的攻势，然后用木棍敲碎了来人的膝盖。最后一个红袍武士喝骂一声，双手持剑，猛力挥砍着朝他冲锋。西利欧疾闪向右，于是那个没了头盔，正挣扎着站起的人遭了殃，那记屠夫般的猛斩正中他肩脖交接处。利剑砍碎锁甲、皮革和血肉，此人跪倒在地，厉声惨叫。杀他的人还来不及抽出剑，西利欧已刺中他的喉头。卫士发出窒息般的叫声，蹒跚后退，双手掐着脖子，脸如死灰。
Look with your eyes , he had said. She saw: the knight in his pale armor head to foot, legs, throat, and hands sheathed in metal, eyes hidden behind his high white helm, and in his hand cruel steel. Against that: Syrio, in a leather vest, with a wooden sword in his hand. “Syrio, run,” she screamed.
等艾莉亚走到通往厨房的后门时，五个人不是倒地丧命，就是奄奄一息。她听见马林·特兰爵士咒道：“一群废物，”然后拔出长剑。
“The first sword of Braavos does not run,” he sang as Ser Meryn slashed at him. Syrio danced away from his cut, his stick a blur. In a heartbeat, he had bounced blows off the knight’s temple, elbow, and throat, the wood ringing against the metal of helm, gauntlet, and gorget. Arya stood frozen. Ser Meryn advanced; Syrio backed away. He checked the next blow, spun away from the second, deflected the third.
西利欧·佛瑞尔恢复了战斗姿势，牙齿咯咯作响。“小艾莉亚，”他头也不回地叫道，“快走。”
The fourth sliced his stick in two, splintering the wood and shearing through the lead core.
用你的眼睛看，他刚才教导过。于是她看了：骑士穿着全身重铠，头、脚、乃至喉咙、手臂都由钢甲保护，双眼隐藏在纯白高盔后，手拿狰狞的精钢长剑。反观西利欧：皮革背心和手中的木剑。“西利欧，快跑！”她尖叫。
Sobbing, Arya spun and ran.
“布拉佛斯的首席剑士从不临阵脱逃。”他朗声道。马林爵士挥剑朝他砍来，西利欧优雅地闪开，手中木棍划出一阵白光芒朝骑士攻去。才一次心跳间，他接连击中骑士的太阳穴、手肘和喉咙，木头敲响了头盔、护手和颈甲的金属。艾莉亚整个人愣在原地。马林爵士继续进逼，西利欧退后。他挡下一击攻势，躲开第二剑，又挥开第三击。
She plunged through the kitchens and buttery, blind with panic, weaving between cooks and potboys. A baker’s helper stepped in front of her, holding a wooden tray. Arya bowled her over, scattering fragrant loaves of fresh-baked bread on the floor. She heard shouting behind her as she spun around a portly butcher who stood gaping at her with a cleaver in his hands. His arms were red to the elbow.
但第四剑将木棍拦腰砍断，木屑飞溅，铅制骨架断裂。
All that Syrio Forel had taught her went racing through her head. Swift as a deer. Quiet as a shadow. Fear cuts deeper than swords. Quick as a snake. Calm as still water. Fear cuts deeper than swords. Strong as a bear. Fierce as a wolverine. Fear cuts deeper than swords. The man who fears losing has already lost. Fear cuts deeper than swords. Fear cuts deeper than swords. Fear cuts deeper than swords . The grip of her wooden sword was slick with sweat, and Arya was breathing hard when she reached the turret stair. For an instant she froze. Up or down? Up would take her to the covered bridge that spanned the small court to the Tower of the Hand, but that would be the way they’d expect her to go, for certain. Never do what they expect , Syrio once said. Arya went down, around and around, leaping over the narrow stone steps two and three at a time. She emerged in a cavernous vaulted cellar, surrounded by casks of ale stacked twenty feet tall. The only light came through narrow slanting windows high in the wall.
艾莉亚啜泣着迈开脚步，飞奔而去。
The cellar was a dead end. There was no way out but the way she had come in. She dare not go back up those steps, but she couldn’t stay here, either. She had to find her father and tell him what had happened. Her father would protect her.
她冲过厨房和贮藏室，在厨师和侍者间穿梭，害怕得什么都看不清。一个捧着木盘的面包师助手经过她面前，艾莉亚把她整个撞倒，刚出炉、香气四溢的面包洒了一地。她又绕过一个手拿切肉刀，肘部以下全是血，张大嘴巴吃惊地看着她的肥胖屠夫，隐约听见背后的叫喊。
Arya thrust her wooden sword through her belt and began to climb, leaping from cask to cask until she could reach the window. Grasping the stone with both hands, she pulled herself up. The wall was three feet thick, the window a tunnel slanting up and out. Arya wriggled toward daylight. When her head reached ground level, she peered across the bailey to the Tower of the Hand.
西利欧·佛瑞尔所教过的每一件事都在她脑中迅速流窜。疾如鹿，静如影。恐惧比利剑更伤人。迅如蛇，止如水。恐惧比利剑更伤人。壮如熊，猛如狼。恐惧比利剑更伤人。害怕失败者必败无疑。恐惧比利剑更伤人。恐惧比利剑更伤人。恐惧比利剑更伤人。她紧握木剑，汗湿手心，当抵达塔里的楼梯时，已经上气不接下气。她愣了一会儿。往上还是往下？上楼之后会经过覆篷的桥，桥连接着议事厅和首相塔，但他们一定以为她会朝那边去，没错，而且西利欧不是说要“出其不意”吗？于是艾莉亚往下走，一层又一层螺旋，三步并作两步，跳过一级级狭窄的阶梯。直到最后进入宽敞的圆顶地窖，四周的麦酒桶足足堆了二十尺高。惟一的光源是高墙上的倾斜窄窗。
The stout wooden door hung splintered and broken, as if by axes. A dead man sprawled facedown on the steps, his cloak tangled beneath him, the back of his mailed shirt soaked red. The corpse’s cloak was grey wool trimmed with white satin, she saw with sudden terror. She could not tell who he was.
地窖是条死路。除了她进来的路，无路可走。她不敢回头，也不敢留在这里。对了，她得找到父亲，告诉他事情经过才是。父亲会保护她。
“No,” she whispered. What was happening? Where was her father? Why had the red cloaks come for her? She remembered what the man with the yellow beard had said, the day she had found the monsters. If one Hand can die, why not a second? Arya felt tears in her eyes. She held her breath to listen. She heard the sounds of fighting, shouts, screams, the clang of steel on steel, coming through the windows of the Tower of the Hand.
艾莉亚把木剑插进腰带，开始攀爬，在酒桶之间跳跃，终于到了窗边。她双手勾住石头往上拉。墙壁足有三尺厚，窗户有如一条往上向外倾斜的隧道。艾莉亚扭动身躯，朝天光爬去。当她的头到达地面的高度时，她隔着内城，朝首相塔望去。
She could not go back. Her father …
原本坚实的木门只剩裂片、破败不堪，似乎被斧头砍烂。一个死人面朝下倒在阶梯上，披风压在身子下，后背的锁甲衫上全是鲜血。她突然惊恐地发现那是件灰羊毛镶白缎边的披风。但她看不出来那是谁。
Arya closed her eyes. For a moment she was too frightened to move. They had killed Jory and Wyl and Heward, and that guardsman on the step, whoever he had been. They could kill her father too, and her if they caught her. “Fear cuts deeper than swords,” she said aloud, but it was no good pretending to be a water dancer, Syrio had been a water dancer and the white knight had probably killed him, and anyhow she was only a little girl with a wooden stick, alone and afraid.
“怎么会这样？”她小声说。到底出了什么事？父亲又在哪里？红袍武士为何来抓她？她忆起自己发现怪兽那天，那个黄胡子男人所说过的话：既然死了一个首相，为什么不能死第二个？艾莉亚眼里不自觉地充满泪水。她屏气倾听，听见从首相塔窗内传出打斗声，叫喊声，哀嚎声和武器交击声。
She squirmed out into the yard, glancing around warily as she climbed to her feet. The castle seemed deserted. The Red Keep was never deserted. All the people must be hiding inside, their doors barred. Arya glanced up longingly at her bedchamber, then moved away from the Tower of the Hand, keeping close to the wall as she slid from shadow to shadow. She pretended she was chasing cats … except she was the cat now, and if they caught her, they would kill her.
她不能回去。父亲他……
Moving between buildings and over walls, keeping stone to her back wherever possible so no one could surprise her, Arya reached the stables almost without incident. A dozen gold cloaks in mail and plate ran past as she was edging across the inner bailey, but without knowing whose side they were on, she hunched down low in the shadows and let them pass.
艾莉亚闭上了眼睛，一时间害怕得不敢动弹。他们杀了乔里、韦尔和海华，以及楼梯上那个不知名的守卫。说不定他们也会杀掉父亲，若她被逮着的话，恐怕也难逃一死。“恐惧比利剑更伤人，”她大声说，但假装自己是水舞者无济于事，何况身为水舞者的西利欧很可能已死在白骑士手下。她只是个担惊受怕、孤伶伶的小女孩，手中只有一把木剑。
Hullen, who had been master of horse at Winterfell as long as Arya could remember, was slumped on the ground by the stable door. He had been stabbed so many times it looked as if his tunic was patterned with scarlet flowers. Arya was certain he was dead, but when she crept closer, his eyes opened. “Arya Underfoot,” he whispered. “You must … warn your … your lord father …” Frothy red spittle bubbled from his mouth. The master of horse closed his eyes again and said no more.
她挤着身子，爬进广场，小心翼翼地环顾四周后，方才站起。城堡似乎空无一人，可城堡绝不可能空无一人。大家一定都关上门躲了起来。艾莉亚思慕地望望自己的卧房，然后沿着墙边阴影，离开了首相塔。她假装自己在抓猫……只可惜现在被抓的是她，而一旦被抓，铁定没命。
Inside were more bodies; a groom she had played with, and three of her father’s household guard. A wagon, laden with crates and chests, stood abandoned near the door of the stable. The dead men must have been loading it for the trip to the docks when they were attacked. Arya snuck closer. One of the corpses was Desmond, who’d shown her his longsword and promised to protect her father. He lay on his back, staring blindly at the ceiling as flies crawled across his eyes. Close to him was a dead man in the red cloak and lion-crest helm of the Lannisters. Only one, though. Every northerner is worth ten of these southron swords , Desmond had told her. “You liar !” she said, kicking his body in a sudden fury.
艾莉亚在建筑和高墙间穿梭，尽可能背靠着墙，防止别人偷袭，最后总算平安无事地抵达马厩。穿过内城时，她看到十来个全副武装、穿着锁甲和全身铠甲的金袍卫士从身边跑过，但由于不知他们站哪一边，所以她躲在阴影里蹲低身子等他们过去。
The animals were restless in their stalls, whickering and snorting at the scent of blood. Arya’s only plan was to saddle a horse and flee, away from the castle and the city. All she had to do was stay on the kingsroad and it would take her back to Winterfell. She took a bridle and harness off the wall.
从艾莉亚有记忆以来便担任临冬城马房总管的胡伦趴在马厩门边的地上。他身上中刀无数，以致于外衣好似绣满了腥红花朵。艾莉亚本来确定他已经死了，然而等她爬进去，他却睁开眼睛。“捣蛋鬼艾莉亚，”他小声说，“你快去……警告你……你父亲大人……”马房总管嘴里冒出红色泡沫，接着合上眼睛，不再说话。
As she crossed in back of the wagon, a fallen chest caught her eye. It must have been knocked down in the fight or dropped as it was being loaded. The wood had split, the lid opening to spill the chest’s contents across the ground. Arya recognized silks and satins and velvets she never wore. She might need warm clothes on the kingsroad, though … and besides …
马厩里陈尸累累，有一个跟她玩耍过的马僮，三个父亲的贴身护卫。一辆满载箱子行李的马车弃置门边。这些人遭到攻击时，想必是正准备把东西运到码头吧。艾莉亚偷偷靠近，发现其中一具尸首是戴斯蒙，那个曾经拿长剑给她看，向她保证会保护父亲的戴斯蒙。他背朝地，空洞地仰视屋顶，苍蝇爬过他的眼睛。他旁边死了一个戴着狮盔的兰尼斯特红袍武士。只有一个。戴斯蒙不是告诉她“咱北方人一个人抵得上南方人十个”吗？“你骗人！”她突然一阵暴怒，踢了那尸体一脚。
Arya knelt in the dirt among the scattered clothes. She found a heavy woolen cloak, a velvet skirt and a silk tunic and some smallclothes, a dress her mother had embroidered for her, a silver baby bracelet she might sell. Shoving the broken lid out of the way, she groped inside the chest for Needle. She had hidden it way down at the bottom, under everything, but her stuff had all been jumbled around when the chest was dropped. For a moment Arya was afraid someone had found the sword and stolen it. Then her fingers felt the hardness of metal under a satin gown.
厩里的马都吓坏了，嘶叫个不停，不时对着呛鼻的血腥吐气。艾莉亚脑中所想只是赶紧找匹马儿放上马鞍，然后溜之大吉，逃得远远的。她只要沿着国王大道，就可以回到临冬城。于是她从墙上拿下一副马鞍和缰绳。
“There she is,” a voice hissed close behind her.
当她走到马车背后时，一个倒在地上的箱子吸引了她的注意。箱子一定是在打斗中被碰落，或在搬运途中掉下的。木板已经裂开，箱盖向上掀起，东西洒了一地。艾莉亚看到那些她从没穿过的绫罗绸缎，不过，旅行途中她可能会需要御寒衣物……而且……
Startled, Arya whirled. A stableboy stood behind her, a smirk on his face, his filthy white undertunic peeking out from beneath a soiled jerkin. His boots were covered with manure, and he had a pitchfork in one hand. “Who are you?” she asked.
艾莉亚跪在泥地上散乱的衣物之中。她找到一件厚重的羊毛斗篷，一条天鹅绒裙子和一件丝质外衣，几条内衣裤，一件母亲为她缝制的裙服，还有一个可以变卖的银手镯。她推开破裂的盖板，在衣箱里翻找“缝衣针”。她原本把剑藏在箱子最底端，可箱子掉落时东西全搅成一团。艾莉亚突然很害怕有人先她一步找到剑，并把剑给偷走了。好在她的手指随即碰触到缎子礼服下的坚硬金属。
“She don’t know me,” he said, “but I knows her, oh, yes. The wolf girl.”
“原来她在这儿啊。”一个声音嘶喊着朝她逼近。
“Help me saddle a horse,” Arya pleaded, reaching back into the chest, groping for Needle. “My father’s the Hand of the King, he’ll reward you.”
艾莉亚惊慌旋身。只见眼前站了个马僮，他脸上挂着不自然的笑容，穿了件脏兮兮的皮背心，里面也是件肮脏的白上衣，靴子沾满肥料，一手拿着根干草叉。“你是谁？”她问。
“Father’s dead,” the boy said. He shuffled toward her. “It’s the queen who’ll be rewarding me. Come here, girl.”
“她不认得我，”他说，“可我却认得她哩，嘿嘿，没错，认得小狼女哟。”
“Stay away!” Her fingers closed around Needle’s hilt.
“帮我装马鞍好吗？”艾莉亚拜托他，一边伸手到箱里，掏拿缝衣针。“我父亲是国王的首相，他会奖赏你的。”
“I says, come.” He grabbed her arm, hard.
“你老爸死翘翘啦。”男孩边说边向她靠近。“会奖赏我的是王后。小妹妹，过来。”
Everything Syrio Forel had ever taught her vanished in a heartbeat. In that instant of sudden terror, the only lesson Arya could remember was the one Jon Snow had given her, the very first.
“不要过来！”她握住缝衣针的剑柄。
She stuck him with the pointy end, driving the blade upward with a wild, hysterical strength.
“我叫你‘过来’。”他使劲抓住她的手。
Needle went through his leather jerkin and the white flesh of his belly and came out between his shoulder blades. The boy dropped the pitchfork and made a soft noise, something between a gasp and a sigh. His hands closed around the blade. “Oh, gods,” he moaned, as his undertunic began to redden. “Take it out.”
在那性命攸关的刹那，西利欧·佛瑞尔教她的一切招式全部消失无踪。在那恐惧的瞬间，艾莉亚惟一记得的要诀是琼恩·雪诺教她的那一招，她学会的第一招。
When she took it out, he died.
她用尖的那端去刺敌人，使出突如其来、歇斯底里般的蛮力往上猛刺。
The horses were screaming. Arya stood over the body, still and frightened in the face of death. Blood had gushed from the boy’s mouth as he collapsed, and more was seeping from the slit in his belly, pooling beneath his body. His palms were cut where he’d grabbed at the blade. She backed away slowly, Needle red in her hand. She had to get away, someplace far from here, someplace safe away from the stableboy’s accusing eyes.
缝衣针刺进他的皮背心和白肚皮，从肩胛骨穿出来。男孩抛下干草叉，发出介于惊呼和叹息之间的绵软声音。他的手抓住剑。“喔，老天。”他呻吟道。他的上衣开始泛红。“把它拔出来。”
She snatched up the bridle and harness again and ran to her mare, but as she lifted the saddle to the horse’s back, Arya realized with a sudden sick dread that the castle gates would be closed. Even the postern doors would likely be guarded. Maybe the guards wouldn’t recognize her. If they thought she was a boy, perhaps they’d let her … no, they’d have orders not to let anyone out, it wouldn’t matter whether they knew her or not.
等她拔出剑，他已经死了。
But there was another way out of the castle …
马儿惊慌嘶叫。艾莉亚站在尸体旁，面对死亡，镇静而又害怕。男孩倒地时口冒鲜血，现在有更多的血从他腹部伤口涌出，在尸身下聚集成潭。他刚才握剑的手掌也被割伤。她慢慢后退，擎着血淋淋的缝衣针。她想离开，她必须离开，她要躲到远离这马僮充满控诉的眼神的地方。
The saddle slipped from Arya’s fingers and fell to the dirt with a thump and a puff of dust. Could she find the room with the monsters again? She wasn’t certain, yet she knew she had to try.
于是她慌忙抓起马鞍和缰绳，朝她的母马跑去。然而正当举鞍准备放上马背时，艾莉亚突然恐惧地想到城门一定已经关闭，边门也多半有人看守。或许守卫认不出她。如果他们把她当成男孩，或许就会让她……不对，他们一定接到了不准任何人出去的命令，所以认不认出她都一样。
She found the clothing she’d gathered and slipped into the cloak, concealing Needle beneath its folds. The rest of her things she tied in a roll. With the bundle under her arm, she crept to the far end of the stable. Unlatching the back door, she peeked out anxiously. She could hear the distant sound of swordplay, and the shivery wail of a man screaming in pain across the bailey. She would need to go down the serpentine steps, past the small kitchen and the pig yard, that was how she’d gone last time, chasing the black tomcat … only that would take her right past the barracks of the gold cloaks. She couldn’t go that way. Arya tried to think of another way. If she crossed to the other side of the castle, she could creep along the river wall and through the little godswood … but first she’d have to cross the yard, in the plain view of the guards on the walls.
还有一条路可以离开城堡……
She had never seen so many men on the walls. Gold cloaks, most of them, armed with spears. Some of them knew her by sight. What would they do if they saw her running across the yard? She’d look so small from up there, would they be able to tell who she was? Would they care?
马鞍从艾莉亚指间滑落，咚地一声，掉在泥土地上，溅起一阵灰尘。她还得去找那个充满怪兽的房间吗？她不确定，但她知道自己非试不可。
She had to leave now , she told herself, but when the moment came, she was too frightened to move.
她找到刚才收集的衣服，然后披上斗篷，以遮掩缝衣针。她把其余东西绑成一束，将包裹夹在腋下，溜到马厩的另一头。她打开后门的锁，不安地向外偷瞄。远处传来剑击声，内城那边还有个人在垂死哀嚎。她必须走下螺旋梯，穿过小厨房和养猪场，上次她追赶黑公猫就是走的这条路……可这样走会直接经过金袍卫士的军营，所以行不通。艾莉亚绞尽脑汁地搜索别的逃跑路线，如果她穿过城堡的另一边，可以沿着河岸的城墙，走过小神木林……但她必须首先冒着城上守卫的众目睽睽，越过眼前这片广场。
Calm as still water , a small voice whispered in her ear. Arya was so startled she almost dropped her bundle. She looked around wildly, but there was no one in the stable but her, and the horses, and the dead men.
她从没见过这么多人同时站在城墙上。其中大多是持枪的金袍武士，他们中有些人一眼就可认出她来。如果他们见她跑过广场，会怎么做？城墙距离这么远，她看起来一定像个小不点，他们还能辨别她吗？他们会理会一个小女孩吗？
Quiet as a shadow , she heard. Was it her own voice, or Syrio’s? She could not tell, yet somehow it calmed her fears.
她告诉自己必须立刻动身，然而当要实际采取行动，她却害怕得不敢动弹。
She stepped out of the stable.
止如水，一个小小的声音在耳畔响起。艾莉亚吓了一大跳，差点把东西掉在地上。她慌乱地环顾四周，但马厩里除了她就只有马儿和死人。
It was the scariest thing she’d ever done. She wanted to run and hide, but she made herself walk across the yard, slowly, putting one foot in front of the other as if she had all the time in the world and no reason to be afraid of anyone. She thought she could feel their eyes, like bugs crawling on her skin under her clothes. Arya never looked up. If she saw them watching, all her courage would desert her, she knew, and she would drop the bundle of clothes and run and cry like a baby, and then they would have her. She kept her gaze on the ground. By the time she reached the shadow of the royal sept on the far side of the yard, Arya was cold with sweat, but no one had raised the hue and cry.
静如影，那声音又来了。她说不准这是自己的声音，还是西利欧的话语，但不知怎地她渐渐不怕了。
The sept was open and empty. Inside, half a hundred prayer candles burned in a fragrant silence. Arya figured the gods would never miss two. She stuffed them up her sleeves, and left by a back window. Sneaking back to the alley where she had cornered the one-eared tom was easy, but after that she got lost. She crawled in and out of windows, hopped over walls, and felt her way through dark cellars, quiet as a shadow. Once she heard a woman weeping. It took her more than an hour to find the low narrow window that slanted down to the dungeon where the monsters waited.
她迈开步伐，走出马厩。
She tossed her bundle through and doubled back to light her candle. That was chancy; the fire she’d remembered seeing had burnt down to embers, and she heard voices as she was blowing on the coals. Cupping her fingers around the flickering candle, she went out the window as they were coming in the door, without ever getting a glimpse of who it was.
这是她一辈子所做过最恐怖的事。她想拔腿就跑，找个地方躲起来，但她强迫自己“走”完全程，慢慢地，一步接一步，仿佛她多的是时间，完全没必要害怕。她感觉到他们的视线如同虫子一样在她衣服下爬来爬去，但她头也不抬。艾莉亚很清楚如果她看见他们盯着自己，所有的勇气都会弃她而去，然后她就会扔下衣服，像个小婴儿一样哭哭啼啼，逃之夭夭。她便只瞧地面。等艾莉亚抵达广场彼端王家圣堂的阴影下，已经一身冷汗。好在没有人注意到她，没有人出声吆喝。
This time the monsters did not frighten her. They seemed almost old friends. Arya held the candle over her head. With each step she took, the shadows moved against the walls, as if they were turning to watch her pass. “Dragons,” she whispered. She slid Needle out from under her cloak. The slender blade seemed very small and the dragons very big, yet somehow Arya felt better with steel in her hand.
圣堂空荡荡的，里面，五十来支蜡烛静静地发散香气。艾莉亚猜想天上诸神应该不会介意少两根吧。于是她揣了两根塞进袖子，然后从后窗离开。潜回先前她堵住独耳公猫的巷子简单，但之后要找路就难了。她爬进爬出，翻过一道道围墙，在黑暗的地窖里摸索。静如影。途中她还听见女人的哭泣。足足花了一个多小时她才找到那扇向下倾斜，通往怪兽地牢的窄窗。
The long windowless hall beyond the door was as black as she remembered. She held Needle in her left hand, her sword hand, the candle in her right fist. Hot wax ran down across her knuckles. The entrance to the well had been to the left, so Arya went right. Part of her wanted to run, but she was afraid of snuffing out her candle. She heard the faint squeaking of rats and glimpsed a pair of tiny glowing eyes on the edge of the light, but rats did not scare her. Other things did. It would be so easy to hide here, as she had hidden from the wizard and the man with the forked beard. She could almost see the stableboy standing against the wall, his hands curled into claws with the blood still dripping from the deep gashes in his palms where Needle had cut him. He might be waiting to grab her as she passed. He would see her candle coming a long way off. Maybe she would be better off without the light …
她先把包裹丢进去，然后快步跑回去点蜡烛。这太惊险了。她印象中的炭火已经烧得只剩余烬，当她忙着吹气以让它重新活跃时，听见有人进屋的声音。她赶在他们进门前，用手呵护摇曳的烛焰，从窗户翻出去，连瞥一眼来者是谁都来不及。
Fear cuts deeper than swords , the quiet voice inside her whispered. Suddenly Arya remembered the crypts at Winterfell. They were a lot scarier than this place, she told herself. She’d been just a little girl the first time she saw them. Her brother Robb had taken them down, her and Sansa and baby Bran, who’d been no bigger than Rickon was now. They’d only had one candle between them, and Bran’s eyes had gotten as big as saucers as he stared at the stone faces of the Kings of Winter, with their wolves at their feet and their iron swords across their laps.
这回她一点也不怕那些怪兽，甚至觉得他们像老朋友。艾莉亚将蜡烛举到头顶，每走一步，墙上的影子都跟着移动，仿佛他们都转头注视她。“原来是龙啊。”她小声说。她从斗篷里抽出缝衣针。虽然纤细的剑身看起来好小，群龙看起来好大，但有剑在手，艾莉亚总算觉得比较安全。
Robb took them all the way down to the end, past Grandfather and Brandon and Lyanna, to show them their own tombs. Sansa kept looking at the stubby little candle, anxious that it might go out. Old Nan had told her there were spiders down here, and rats as big as dogs. Robb smiled when she said that. “There are worse things than spiders and rats,” he whispered. “This is where the dead walk.” That was when they heard the sound, low and deep and shivery. Baby Bran had clutched at Arya’s hand.
门后那间无窗的长厅，一如她记忆中那般黑暗。她左手握着缝衣针，右手拿着蜡烛。热烫的蜡油流下指关节。通往那口井的路在左边，所以艾莉亚往右走。她很想拔腿奔跑，又怕弄熄蜡烛。她听见微弱的老鼠吱吱声，在光线所及的范围边缘看到一双发亮的小眼睛。她不怕老鼠，却怕其他不知名的东西。其实她大可就躲在这里，就像上次她躲巫师和长八字胡的人一样。她几乎可以看见那个马僮就站在墙边，双手团成鹰爪，手掌被缝衣针深深割伤的地方还流着血。他正等着她经过呢。他大老远便可以看见她的烛光。或许她还是把火熄灭的好……
When the spirit stepped out of the open tomb, pale white and moaning for blood, Sansa ran shrieking for the stairs, and Bran wrapped himself around Robb’s leg, sobbing. Arya stood her ground and gave the spirit a punch. It was only Jon, covered with flour. “You stupid,” she told him, “you scared the baby,” but Jon and Robb just laughed and laughed, and pretty soon Bran and Arya were laughing too.
恐惧比利剑更伤人，脑中那个静默的声音再度响起。艾莉亚突然忆起临冬城下的墓窖。她告诉自己那儿比这里可怕多了。第一次去的时候，她还是个小女孩。那次由哥哥罗柏领队，带着她、珊莎还有小布兰，当时的布兰还没现在的瑞肯大呢。他们只带了一根蜡烛，布兰的眼睛睁得像盘子，目不转睛地盯着列位冬境之王的石面尊容，以及他们脚边的冰原狼和膝上的铁剑。
The memory made Arya smile, and after that the darkness held no more terrors for her. The stableboy was dead, she’d killed him, and if he jumped out at her she’d kill him again. She was going home. Everything would be better once she was home again, safe behind Winterfell’s grey granite walls.
罗柏领他们走到长廊末尾，经过祖父、布兰登和莱安娜的雕像，让他们瞧瞧自己未来的坟墓。然而珊莎的目光却一直不敢离开越烧越短的蜡烛，担心它随时会熄灭。老奶妈之前告诉她，这下面有蜘蛛，还有狗一般大的老鼠。罗柏听她说起这事，只是微笑。“还有比蜘蛛和老鼠更可怕的东西哦，”他悄声道，“这是死人活跃的地方。”就在那时，他们听见了低沉而震颤的声音。小布兰紧紧抓住艾莉亚的手。
Her footsteps sent soft echoes hurrying ahead of her as Arya plunged deeper into the darkness.
当幽灵从打开的坟墓里走出来，呻吟着要吸活人鲜血时，珊莎尖叫着朝楼梯跑去，布兰抱住罗柏的大腿抽噎起来，艾莉亚则站在原地，捶了幽灵一下。那不过是身上洒满面粉的琼恩罢了。“你笨蛋啦，”她告诉他，“看你把弟弟吓成这样。”但琼恩和罗柏却只是相视大笑，没过多久布兰和艾莉亚也跟着笑了。
*SANSA
忆起往事，艾莉亚也不禁微笑。之后，黑暗便不再可怕。马僮已死，且是她亲手所杀，如果他又跳出来，她就再杀他一次。她要回家。等她回到家，安全地躲在临冬城的灰色大理石墙后，一切都会没事的。
T hey came for Sansa on the third day.
艾莉亚的脚步发出轻轻的回音，抢在她身前，朝黑暗的深处迈去。
She chose a simple dress of dark grey wool, plainly cut but richly embroidered around the collar and sleeves. Her fingers felt thick and clumsy as she struggled with the silver fastenings without the benefit of servants. Jeyne Poole had been confined with her, but Jeyne was useless. Her face was puffy from all her crying, and she could not seem to stop sobbing about her father.
第五十二章 珊莎
“I’m certain your father is well,” Sansa told her when she had finally gotten the dress buttoned right. “I’ll ask the queen to let you see him.” She thought that kindness might lift Jeyne’s spirits, but the other girl just looked at her with red, swollen eyes and began to cry all the harder. She was such a child .
事发后第三天，他们才带珊莎去见王后。
Sansa had wept too, the first day. Even within the stout walls of Maegor’s Holdfast, with her door closed and barred, it was hard not to be terrified when the killing began. She had grown up to the sound of steel in the yard, and scarcely a day of her life had passed without hearing the clash of sword on sword, yet somehow knowing that the fighting was real made all the difference in the world. She heard it as she had never heard it before, and there were other sounds as well, grunts of pain, angry curses, shouts for help, and the moans of wounded and dying men. In the songs, the knights never screamed nor begged for mercy.
她选了一条式样简单的深灰色羊毛裙，剪裁虽然朴素，袖口和领子却绣得精细。没有仆人帮忙，她只得自己系上银色衣带，顿时觉得手指笨拙而不灵活。珍妮·普尔虽和她软禁在一起，却一点忙也帮不上。她哭肿了脸，一直为了她父亲哭哭啼啼。
So she wept, pleading through her door for them to tell her what was happening, calling for her father, for Septa Mordane, for the king, for her gallant prince. If the men guarding her heard her pleas, they gave no answer. The only time the door opened was late that night, when they thrust Jeyne Poole inside, bruised and shaking. “They’re killing everyone,” the steward’s daughter had shrieked at her. She went on and on. The Hound had broken down her door with a warhammer, she said. There were bodies on the stair of the Tower of the Hand, and the steps were slick with blood. Sansa dried her own tears as she struggled to comfort her friend. They went to sleep in the same bed, cradled in each other’s arms like sisters.
“我相信你父亲一定没事，”总算扣好衣服后，珊莎告诉她，“我会请王后让你见见他。”她本以为如此好心的提议定可提起珍妮的精神，想不到她却用红肿的眼睛怔怔地看她，然后哭得更厉害。真是个长不大的小孩。
The second day was even worse. The room where Sansa had been confined was at the top of the highest tower of Maegor’s Holdfast. From its window, she could see that the heavy iron portcullis in the gatehouse was down, and the drawbridge drawn up over the deep dry moat that separated the keep-within-a-keep from the larger castle that surrounded it. Lannister guardsmen prowled the walls with spears and crossbows to hand. The fighting was over, and the silence of the grave had settled over the Red Keep. The only sounds were Jeyne Poole’s endless whimpers and sobs.
事发当天，珊莎也哭过。纵然有梅葛楼重重厚墙所保护，且房门紧闭放下门闩，但屠杀开始时却依旧骇人。她从小听着广场上的金铁交击声长大，几乎天天都会见识刀剑，可一旦知道外面是来真的，一切又都不一样了。它们变得那么陌生，闻所未闻的声音不断传来：吃痛闷哼声、愤怒咒骂声、呼喊求救声，以及负伤垂死之人的呻吟。歌谣里的骑士从来不会惨叫，从来不会跪地求饶。
They were fed—hard cheese and fresh-baked bread and milk to break their fast, roast chicken and greens at midday, and a late supper of beef and barley stew—but the servants who brought the meals would not answer Sansa’s questions. That evening, some women brought her clothes from the Tower of the Hand, and some of Jeyne’s things as well, but they seemed nearly as frightened as Jeyne, and when she tried to talk to them, they fled from her as if she had the grey plague. The guards outside the door still refused to let them leave the room.
所以她哭了，隔着门请求他们告诉她到底发生了什么。她呼唤父亲，呼唤茉丹修女，呼唤国王，呼唤她的白马王子。可惜就算门外守卫听见了她的哀求，他们也没有回应。他们只在当天深夜打开门，把浑身淤伤、颤抖不已的珍妮·普尔推进来。“他们把所有人都杀光了。”管家的女儿朝她尖叫。说猎狗拿着战锤破门进入她的房间，首相塔的螺旋梯上全是死尸，染血的阶梯滑溜溜的。珊莎擦干眼泪，努力安慰自己的朋友。她们睡在同一张床上，相互搂抱，宛如姐妹。
“Please, I need to speak to the queen again,” Sansa told them, as she told everyone she saw that day. “She’ll want to talk to me, I know she will. Tell her I want to see her, please. If not the queen, then Prince Joffrey, if you’d be so kind. We’re to marry when we’re older.”
第二天情况更糟。珊莎被监禁的房间位于梅葛楼最高塔的顶层。从窗户望去可以看到城门楼的铁闸已经放下，干涸护城河上的吊桥升起，切断了这座城中城与城堡其余部分的联系。兰尼斯特卫兵手执长枪和十字弓逡巡于城墙之上。打斗已经结束，宛如墓地般的死寂笼罩了红堡，只剩下珍妮·普尔无尽的抽噎啜泣。
At sunset on the second day, a great bell began to ring. Its voice was deep and sonorous, and the long slow clanging filled Sansa with a sense of dread. The ringing went on and on, and after a while they heard other bells answering from the Great Sept of Baelor on Visenya’s Hill. The sound rumbled across the city like thunder, warning of the storm to come.
她们没被饿着——早餐是硬乳酪，刚出炉的面包和牛奶，中午是烤鸡和青蔬，晚餐则是牛肉大麦浓汤——但送饭的人拒绝回答珊莎的问题。当天傍晚，有几位妇人从首相塔带了些她和珍妮的衣物过来，可她们惊慌失措的程度与珍妮不相上下，她刚要开口问话，她们便仿如见了灰疫病般避之唯恐不及。门外的守卫也依旧不让她们离开房间。
“What is it?” Jeyne asked, covering her ears. “Why are they ringing the bells?”
“求求你，我要跟王后谈谈，”她对他们说，那天她对每个人都这样说。“她想见我的，我知道。请你们转告她我要见她。如果见不到王后，那麻烦你们去找乔佛里王子。我和他长大以后要结婚的。”
“The king is dead.” Sansa could not say how she knew it, yet she did. The slow, endless clanging filled their room, as mournful as a dirge. Had some enemy stormed the castle and murdered King Robert? Was that the meaning of the fighting they had heard?
震耳欲聋的钟声于那天日落时分响起。钟声沉厚而洪亮，缓慢悠长的余音却教珊莎感到莫名的恐惧。钟声响而未绝，一会儿之后她们听见维桑尼亚丘陵上贝勒大圣堂里的钟也跟着回应。声音宛如阵雷，轰隆响彻全城，预示着即将来临的狂风暴雨。
She went to sleep wondering, restless, and fearful. Was her beautiful Joffrey the king now? Or had they killed him too? She was afraid for him, and for her father. If only they would tell her what was happening …
“发生了什么事？”珍妮捂着耳朵问，“他们为什么敲钟？”
That night Sansa dreamt of Joffrey on the throne, with herself seated beside him in a gown of woven gold. She had a crown on her head, and everyone she had ever known came before her, to bend the knee and say their courtesies.
“国王驾崩了。”珊莎说不上自己如何知道，但她就是知道。缓慢而无止尽的钟声充斥房间，哀伤有如挽歌。难道有敌人攻进城里，杀害了劳勃国王？难道这就是她们所听见的打斗？
The next morning, the morning of the third day, Ser Boros Blount of the Kingsguard came to escort her to the queen.
她满脑疑惑地睡去，睡得很不安稳，提心吊胆。她英俊的乔佛里如今是国王了吗？还是他们连他也一起杀了？她为他担心，也为父亲害怕。如果他们告诉她外面究竟怎么回事就好了……
Ser Boros was an ugly man with a broad chest and short, bandy legs. His nose was flat, his cheeks baggy with jowls, his hair grey and brittle. Today he wore white velvet, and his snowy cloak was fastened with a lion brooch. The beast had the soft sheen of gold, and his eyes were tiny rubies. “You look very handsome and splendid this morning, Ser Boros,” Sansa told him. A lady remembered her courtesies, and she was resolved to be a lady no matter what.
那天晚上，珊莎梦见乔佛里坐在王位上，她自己则穿着一袭金衣靠在他身旁，头顶冠冕，她所认识的每个人都来到她面前屈膝致意。
“And you, my lady,” Ser Boros said in a flat voice. “Her Grace awaits. Come with me.”
翌日清晨，亦即第三天早上，御林铁卫的柏洛斯·布劳恩爵士前来护送她去觐见王后。
There were guards outside her door, Lannister men-at-arms in crimson cloaks and lion-crested helms. Sansa made herself smile at them pleasantly and bid them a good morning as she passed. It was the first time she had been allowed outside the chamber since Ser Arys Oakheart had led her there two mornings past. “To keep you safe, my sweet one,” Queen Cersei had told her. “Joffrey would never forgive me if anything happened to his precious.”
柏洛斯爵士是个胸膛宽厚，有一双向外弯曲的短腿的丑陋男子。他生了个扁鼻，两颊松弛，一头发质糟糕的灰发。这天他穿了白天鹅绒外衣，雪白披风用一个狮子别针系着。狮子镀上一层软金箔，有小小的红宝石镶成的眼睛。“柏洛斯爵士，您今早真是容光焕发，格外迷人哪。”珊莎告诉他。官家小姐无时无刻不能忘记礼貌，而且她下定决心无论如何都要有个官家小姐的样子。
Sansa had expected that Ser Boros would escort her to the royal apartments, but instead he led her out of Maegor’s Holdfast. The bridge was down again. Some workmen were lowering a man on ropes into the depths of the dry moat. When Sansa peered down, she saw a body impaled on the huge iron spikes below. She averted her eyes quickly, afraid to ask, afraid to look too long, afraid he might be someone she knew.
“小姐，您也是哪。”柏洛斯爵士语气平板地说，“王后陛下正在等你。请随我来。”
They found Queen Cersei in the council chambers, seated at the head of a long table littered with papers, candles, and blocks of sealing wax. The room was as splendid as any that Sansa had ever seen. She stared in awe at the carved wooden screen and the twin sphinxes that sat beside the door.
门外有红袍狮盔的兰尼斯特卫兵站岗，珊莎经过时，还特别友好地朝他们微笑早安。这是她自两天前被亚历斯·奥克赫特爵士带来这里后首次踏出房门。“好孩子，这是为你的安全着想，”瑟曦王后告诉她，“如果乔佛里亲爱的女孩出了意外，他一定不会原谅我的。”
“Your Grace,” Ser Boros said when they were ushered inside by another of the Kingsguard, Ser Mandon of the curiously dead face, “I’ve brought the girl.”
珊莎本以为柏洛斯爵士会护送她到王家居室，没想到他却领她走出了梅葛楼。吊桥已再度放下。几名工人正把同伴用绳子垂到干涸的护城河床。珊莎探头一看，只见下方巨大的尖刺上钉了一具尸首。她连忙移开视线，不敢发问，不敢再看，不敢想象那是某位她所认识的人。
Sansa had hoped Joffrey might be with her. Her prince was not there, but three of the king’s councillors were. Lord Petyr Baelish sat on the queen’s left hand, Grand Maester Pycelle at the end of the table, while Lord Varys hovered over them, smelling flowery. All of them were clad in black, she realized with a feeling of dread. Mourning clothes …
他们在议事厅里找到瑟曦王后，她正坐在长桌的首位，桌上堆满纸张、蜡烛和一叠叠的蜡泥。珊莎不曾见过陈设如此华丽的房间，不由得睁大眼睛看着雕花木屏风，以及蹲坐大门两侧的人面狮身兽雕像。
The queen wore a high-collared black silk gown, with a hundred dark red rubies sewn into her bodice, covering her from neck to bosom. They were cut in the shape of teardrops, as if the queen were weeping blood. Cersei smiled to see her, and Sansa thought it was the sweetest and saddest smile she had ever seen. “Sansa, my sweet child,” she said, “I know you’ve been asking for me. I’m sorry that I could not send for you sooner. Matters have been very unsettled, and I have not had a moment. I trust my people have been taking good care of you?”
“王后陛下，”当另一名御林铁卫，生了张死人脸的曼登爵士领他们走进去时，柏洛斯爵士开口说，“我把这女孩带来了。”
“Everyone has been very sweet and pleasant, Your Grace, thank you ever so much for asking,” Sansa said politely. “Only, well, no one will talk to us or tell us what’s happened …”
珊莎原本期盼乔佛里会和王后在一起，可惜她的白马王子没来，反倒是三位重臣在场。派提尔·贝里席伯爵坐在王后左手，派席尔国师在桌子另一边，浑身花香的瓦里斯伯爵则在他们周围晃来晃去。她突然恐惧地发现他们都身着黑衣，那是丧服的颜色啊……
“Us?” Cersei seemed puzzled.
王后穿了一件高领的黑丝礼服，上身缝缀了上百颗暗红宝石，从脖颈直覆到胸部。宝石被琢磨成泪滴的形状，一眼望去，王后仿佛正在泣血。瑟曦见到她，脸上露出珊莎所见过最甜美、却也最哀伤的微笑。“珊莎，我的好孩子。”她说，“我知道你一直想见我，很抱歉我到现在才找你来。只怪最近诸事纷乱，我实在抽不出时间。我想我的手下没让你受委屈罢？”
“We put the steward’s girl in with her,” Ser Boros said. “We did not know what else to do with her.”
“陛下，每个人都对我们既照顾又友好，非常感谢您的关心，”珊莎彬彬有礼地说，“只不过，嗯，没有人愿意跟我们说话，或者告诉我们到底发生了什么……”
The queen frowned. “Next time, you will ask,” she said, her voice sharp. “The gods only know what sort of tales she’s been filling Sansa’s head with.”
“我们？”瑟曦似乎颇感困惑。
“Jeyne’s scared,” Sansa said. “She won’t stop crying. I promised her I’d ask if she could see her father.”
“我们把那个管家的女儿送去跟她一起住，”柏洛斯爵士道，“我们实在不知该拿她怎么办。”
Old Grand Maester Pycelle lowered his eyes.
王后皱起眉头。“下回记得先问，”她口气锐利地说，“天知道她朝珊莎脑子里鬼扯些什么。”
“Her father is well, isn’t he?” Sansa said anxiously. She knew there had been fighting, but surely no one would harm a steward. Vayon Poole did not even wear a sword.
“珍妮她吓坏了，”珊莎说，“整天哭个不停。我答应帮她问可不可以让她见见她父亲。”
Queen Cersei looked at each of the councillors in turn. “I won’t have Sansa fretting needlessly. What shall we do with this little friend of hers, my lords?”
派席尔老国师垂下眼睛。
Lord Petyr leaned forward. “I’ll find a place for her.”
“她父亲没事吧？”珊莎焦急地说。她知道外面发生过打斗，但总不会有人伤害一个做管家的人吧？维扬·普尔平日可是连剑都不配的。
“Not in the city,” said the queen.
瑟曦王后依次扫视每位重臣。“我可不希望珊莎受到无谓的惊吓。诸位大人，我们该如何来安顿她这位小朋友呢？”
“Do you take me for a fool?”
培提尔伯爵往前靠。“我来给她找个地方吧。”
The queen ignored that. “Ser Boros, escort this girl to Lord Petyr’s apartments and instruct his people to keep her there until he comes for her. Tell her that Littlefinger will be taking her to see her father, that ought to calm her down. I want her gone before Sansa returns to her chamber.”
“不要留在城里。”王后说。
“As you command, Your Grace,” Ser Boros said. He bowed deeply, spun on his heel, and took his leave, his long white cloak stirring the air behind him.
“你当我是笨蛋不成？”
Sansa was confused. “I don’t understand,” she said. “Where is Jeyne’s father? Why can’t Ser Boros take her to him instead of Lord Petyr having to do it?” She had promised herself she would be a lady, gentle as the queen and as strong as her mother, the Lady Catelyn, but all of a sudden she was scared again. For a second she thought she might cry. “Where are you sending her? She hasn’t done anything wrong, she’s a good girl.”
王后没理他。“柏洛斯爵士，劳驾您护送这位小妹妹前往培提尔大人住处，并吩咐他的手下妥善照顾，直到他回去为止。就跟她说小指头会带她去见她父亲，这样该能安抚她的情绪。我希望你在珊莎回去之前将此事办妥。”
“She’s upset you,” the queen said gently. “We can’t be having that. Not another word, now. Lord Baelish will see that Jeyne’s well taken care of, I promise you.” She patted the chair beside her. “Sit down, Sansa. I want to talk to you.”
“遵命，陛下。”柏洛斯爵士道。他深深一鞠躬，笔直地跃起身，抖着身后的白披风离开。
Sansa seated herself beside the queen. Cersei smiled again, but that did not make her feel any less anxious. Varys was wringing his soft hands together, Grand Maester Pycelle kept his sleepy eyes on the papers in front of him, but she could feel Littlefinger staring. Something about the way the small man looked at her made Sansa feel as though she had no clothes on. Goose bumps pimpled her skin.
珊莎被搞糊涂了。“我不懂，”她说，“珍妮的父亲他人在哪里呢？柏洛斯爵士为何不直接带她去见他，反而要培提尔大人带她去呀？”她本已立志要有淑女风范，要像王后那般温柔，像母亲凯特琳夫人那般坚毅，但这会儿她突然又害怕起来，甚至担心自己会掉下眼泪。“您要把她送到哪儿？她是个好女孩，什么也没做错啊。”
“Sweet Sansa,” Queen Cersei said, laying a soft hand on her wrist. “Such a beautiful child. I do hope you know how much Joffrey and I love you.”
“她害你担惊受怕了，”王后温柔地说，“我们可不能让这种事再度发生。别提她了，嗯？我向你保证，贝里席大人会好好照顾珍妮的。”她拍拍旁边的椅子。“坐下吧，珊莎，我有话跟你说。”
“You do?” Sansa said, breathless. Littlefinger was forgotten. Her prince loved her. Nothing else mattered.
珊莎在王后身旁坐下。瑟曦再度露出微笑，然而这次却没能纾解她的不安。瓦里斯绞着他柔软的双手，派席尔国师撑着充满睡意的眼睛，看着眼前的纸张，但她能感觉小指头盯着自己的视线。矮个子看她的眼神，总让珊莎觉得自己仿佛没穿衣服，不禁浑身起了鸡皮疙瘩。
The queen smiled. “I think of you almost as my own daughter. And I know the love you bear for Joffrey.” She gave a weary shake of her head. “I am afraid we have some grave news about your lord father. You must be brave, child.”
“亲爱的珊莎，”瑟曦王后边说边伸出一只柔软的手，放在她手腕上。“你真是个漂亮的好孩子。我真希望你知道乔佛里和我有多么爱你。”
Her quiet words gave Sansa a chill. “What is it?”
“真的吗？”珊莎简直喘不过气来。小指头顿时被抛到脑后。她的白马王子爱她。其他一切都不重要了。
“Your father is a traitor, dear,” Lord Varys said.
王后微笑道：“我几乎把你当成自己的女儿，我也知道你是真心真意地爱着乔佛里。”她微微摇头。“但关于你父亲大人，恐怕我有些沉重的消息要对你说。孩子，你千万要鼓起勇气。”
Grand Maester Pycelle lifted his ancient head. “With my own ears, I heard Lord Eddard swear to our beloved King Robert that he would protect the young princes as if they were his own sons. And yet the moment the king was dead, he called the small council together to steal Prince Joffrey’s rightful throne.”
她从容的话语却教珊莎打了个冷颤。“什么消息？”
“No,” Sansa blurted. “He wouldn’t do that. He wouldn’t!”
“你父亲叛国，亲爱的。”瓦里斯伯爵道。
The queen picked up a letter. The paper was torn and stiff with dried blood, but the broken seal was her father’s, the direwolf stamped in pale wax. “We found this on the captain of your household guard, Sansa. It is a letter to my late husband’s brother Stannis, inviting him to take the crown.”
派席尔国师抬起苍老的头颅。“我亲耳听见艾德大人向劳勃国王发誓会保护小王子，把他当成自己儿子看待。想不到等国王一死，他就立刻召集重臣，妄图窃取本应属于乔佛里的王位。”
“Please, Your Grace, there’s been a mistake.” Sudden panic made her dizzy and faint. “Please, send for my father, he’ll tell you, he would never write such a letter, the king was his friend.”
“不，”珊莎脱口而出，“他绝不会做这种事，他绝不会！”
“Robert thought so,” said the queen. “This betrayal would have broken his heart. The gods are kind, that he did not live to see it.” She sighed. “Sansa, sweetling, you must see what a dreadful position this has left us in. You are innocent of any wrong, we all know that, and yet you are the daughter of a traitor. How can I allow you to marry my son?”
王后拣起一封信。信纸撕得稀烂，沾满干涸的血渍，然而上面被揭开的封蜡毫无疑问是父亲的冰原狼家徽。“珊莎，这是我们在你家侍卫队长身上找到的。收信人是我亡夫的弟弟史坦尼斯，信上邀请他来夺取王位。”
“But I love him,” Sansa wailed, confused and frightened. What did they mean to do to her? What had they done to her father? It was not supposed to happen this way. She had to wed Joffrey, they were betrothed, he was promised to her, she had even dreamed about it. It wasn’t fair to take him away from her on account of whatever her father might have done.
“求求您，王后陛下，这一定是误会，”突如其来的恐慌使她感到头晕目眩。“求求您，找我父亲过来，他会向您解释，他是国王的朋友，绝不会写这种信。”
“How well I know that, child,” Cersei said, her voice so kind and sweet. “Why else should you have come to me and told me of your father’s plan to send you away from us, if not for love?”
“劳勃当初也是这么想，”王后道，“他若是地下有知，这件事准会伤透他的心。幸好诸神慈悲，没让他生前见到。”她叹口气。“珊莎，我亲爱的好孩子，你一定也知道这件事让我们有多为难。此事与你无关，这我们都明白，但你毕竟是个叛国者的女儿，你说我怎么敢让你嫁给我儿子呢？”
“It was for love,” Sansa said in a rush. “Father wouldn’t even give me leave to say farewell.” She was the good girl, the obedient girl, but she had felt as wicked as Arya that morning, sneaking away from Septa Mordane, defying her lord father. She had never done anything so willful before, and she would never have done it then if she hadn’t loved Joffrey as much as she did. “He was going to take me back to Winterfell and marry me to some hedge knight, even though it was Joff I wanted. I told him, but he wouldn’t listen.” The king had been her last hope. The king could command Father to let her stay in King’s Landing and marry Prince Joffrey, Sansa knew he could, but the king had always frightened her. He was loud and rough-voiced and drunk as often as not, and he would probably have just sent her back to Lord Eddard, if they even let her see him. So she went to the queen instead, and poured out her heart, and Cersei had listened and thanked her sweetly … only then Ser Arys had escorted her to the high room in Maegor’s Holdfast and posted guards, and a few hours later, the fighting had begun outside. “Please,” she finished, “you have to let me marry Joffrey, I’ll be ever so good a wife to him, you’ll see. I’ll be a queen just like you, I promise.”
“可是我爱他啊。”珊莎既困惑又害怕地啜泣道。他们打算如何处置她？他们又对父亲做了些什么？事情不应该变成这样子的。她一定要嫁给乔佛里，他们不是已经订婚了吗？他不是已经许给她了吗？她还梦见过两人成亲的景象呢。因为父亲的所作所为，便要硬生生将他夺走，实在太不公平了。
Queen Cersei looked to the others. “My lords of the council, what do you say to her plea?”
“孩子，这我难道不清楚吗？”瑟曦慈祥、和蔼又温柔地说，“你若不是爱他，又怎么会来见我，把你父亲送你走的计划倾诉给我听呢？”
“The poor child,” murmured Varys. “A love so true and innocent, Your Grace, it would be cruel to deny it … and yet, what can we do? Her father stands condemned.” His soft hands washed each other in a gesture of helpless distress.
“是啊，我好爱他，”珊莎急促地说，“可父亲连让我说声再见都不准。”她向来是听话乖巧的好女儿，但那天早上她偷偷从茉丹修女身边溜开，违背父亲意愿的时候，却觉得自己跟艾莉亚一样坏。她以前从未如此任性而为，若非她深爱着乔佛里，也不会这么做。“他打算送我回临冬城，把我嫁给默默无闻的雇佣骑士，也不管我只想要。我跟他说了，可他就是听不进去。”她的希望只剩下国王，只有国王才能命令父亲让她留在君临，和乔佛里成亲。话虽如此，她却一直很怕这个讲话粗声粗气，成天喝得酩酊大醉的国王，更何况就算当真见到他，他很可能只会派人把她送回父亲身边。所以她去找王后，将心事和盘吐露，瑟曦听完之后，郑重地向她道谢……接着却派亚历斯爵士护送她到梅葛楼的高塔房间，并在门外安排守卫，没过多久，外面便传来打斗声。“求求您，”她把话说完，“您一定要让我嫁给乔佛里，我会当个好妻子的，真的，我保证会当个像您一样的王后。”
“A child born of traitor’s seed will find that betrayal comes naturally to her,” said Grand Maester Pycelle. “She is a sweet thing now, but in ten years, who can say what treasons she may hatch?”
瑟曦王后看看其他人。“诸位重臣大人，关于她的请求，您们有何看法？”
“No,” Sansa said, horrified. “I’m not, I’d never … I wouldn’t betray Joffrey, I love him, I swear it, I do.”
“可怜的孩子，”瓦里斯喃喃道，“王后陛下，多么纯洁的一片痴情，若不答应她未免也太残忍了……但话又说回来，她父亲终究难辞其咎，我们还能怎么样呢？”他柔软的双手相互搓揉，做出无助又无奈的手势。
“Oh, so poignant,” said Varys. “And yet, it is truly said that blood runs truer than oaths.”
“既然是叛国者的种，只怕背叛之性已在她心中生根发芽。”派席尔国师道，“她眼下是个讨人喜欢的好孩子，可十年以后会怎样呢？谁也说不准。”
“She reminds me of the mother, not the father,” Lord Petyr Baelish said quietly. “Look at her. The hair, the eyes. She is the very image of Cat at the same age.”
“不，”珊莎惊恐地说，“我不是，我不会……我绝不会背叛乔佛里，我爱他啊，我发誓我真的爱他。”
The queen looked at her, troubled, and yet Sansa could see kindness in her clear green eyes. “Child,” she said, “if I could truly believe that you were not like your father, why nothing should please me more than to see you wed to my Joffrey. I know he loves you with all his heart.” She sighed. “And yet, I fear that Lord Varys and the Grand Maester have the right of it. The blood will tell. I have only to remember how your sister set her wolf on my son.”
“噢，真叫人辛酸哪，”瓦里斯道，“但归根结底，毕竟誓言不及血统可靠啊。”
“I’m not like Arya,” Sansa blurted. “She has the traitor’s blood, not me. I’m good , ask Septa Mordane, she’ll tell you, I only want to be Joffrey’s loyal and loving wife.”
“她像母亲，不像父亲，”培提尔·贝里席伯爵轻声说，“你们看看她，这头发和眼晴，十足就是当年的凯特。”
She felt the weight of Cersei’s eyes as the queen studied her face. “I believe you mean it, child.” She turned to face the others. “My lords, it seems to me that if the rest of her kin were to remain loyal in this terrible time, that would go a long way toward laying our fears to rest.”
王后看着她，显然伤透脑筋，但珊莎发现她那对澄澈的碧绿眸子里闪着慈蔼。“孩子，”她说，“如果我能相信你的确和你父亲不一样，那再没有什么事比你嫁给乔佛里更让我高兴的了。我知道他也是全心全意爱着你。”她叹口气，“怕只怕瓦里斯大人和派席尔国师说得没错。血统决定一切，我还记得你妹妹是怎么放狼咬我儿子的。”
Grand Maester Pycelle stroked his huge soft beard, his wide brow furrowed in thought. “Lord Eddard has three sons.”
“我跟艾莉亚才不一样，”珊莎冲口便说，“她流着叛国者的血液，我可没有。我很听话，问问茉丹修女就知道了。我只想作乔佛里忠诚的好妻子。”
“Mere boys,” Lord Petyr said with a shrug. “I should be more concerned with Lady Catelyn and the Tullys.”
王后仔细审视她的脸，她能感觉王后眼神的重量。“孩子，我相信你说的都是真话。”她转头面对其他人。“诸位大人，依我看来，如果她的家人都肯在此动荡之际宣誓效忠王室，那么我们大可不必为她担心。”
The queen took Sansa’s hand in both of hers. “Child, do you know your letters?”
派席尔国师捻捻大把的软胡须，若有所思地皱起宽眉。“艾德大人有三个儿子。”
Sansa nodded nervously. She could read and write better than any of her brothers, although she was hopeless at sums.
“都是些孩子，”培提尔伯爵耸肩，“我比较担心凯特琳夫人和徒利家族。”
“I am pleased to hear that. Perhaps there is hope for you and Joffrey still …”
王后双手握住珊莎手掌。“孩子，你可会读书写字？”
“What do you want me to do?”
珊莎不安地点点头。她不论读书写字都比兄弟要行，但一遇算术就没办法。
“You must write your lady mother, and your brother, the eldest … what is his name?”
“我很高兴。或许你和乔佛里还有希望……”
“Robb,” Sansa said.
“您要我怎么做呢？”
“The word of your lord father’s treason will no doubt reach them soon. Better that it should come from you. You must tell them how Lord Eddard betrayed his king.”
“你得写信给你母亲，以及你大哥……他叫什么名字？”
Sansa wanted Joffrey desperately, but she did not think she had the courage to do as the queen was asking. “But he never … I don’t … Your Grace, I wouldn’t know what to say …”
“罗柏。”珊莎说。
The queen patted her hand. “We will tell you what to write, child. The important thing is that you urge Lady Catelyn and your brother to keep the king’s peace.”
“你父亲大人叛国的事，相信不久自会传到他们耳中，所以由你亲自来讲比较妥善。你得告诉他们艾德大人背叛国王的经过。”
“It will go hard for them if they don’t,” said Grand Maester Pycelle. “By the love you bear them, you must urge them to walk the path of wisdom.”
珊莎极度渴望乔佛里，但她却不知自己是否有照王后吩咐去做的勇气。“可他没有……我不知……陛下，我不知道该怎么写……”
“Your lady mother will no doubt fear for you dreadfully,” the queen said. “You must tell her that you are well and in our care, that we are treating you gently and seeing to your every want. Bid them to come to King’s Landing and pledge their fealty to Joffrey when he takes his throne. If they do that … why, then we shall know that there is no taint in your blood, and when you come into the flower of your womanhood, you shall wed the king in the Great Sept of Baelor, before the eyes of gods and men.”
王后拍拍她的手。“好孩子，我们会告诉你该怎么写。重要的是你必须敦促凯特琳夫人和你哥哥维护国内和平。”
… wed the king … The words made her breath come faster, yet still Sansa hesitated. “Perhaps … if I might see my father, talk to him about …”
“如果他们不愿听从，情况可对他们不利。”派席尔国师道，“看在你们之间的亲情份上，说什么你都该敦请他们做出明智的抉择。”
“Treason?” Lord Varys hinted.
“你的母亲大人此刻一定非常为你担心，”王后道，“你该告诉她，你正受我们妥善的照顾，一切平安无事，衣食无虞。并邀请他们在乔佛里登基之日，前来君临宣誓效忠。如果他们照办……哎，那我们就知道你的血液里没有一丝一毫的污染，等你有了月事，成为真正的女人，我们就让你和国王在贝勒大圣堂结婚，让天上诸神和地上百姓作见证。”
“You disappoint me, Sansa,” the queen said, with eyes gone hard as stones. “We’ve told you of your father’s crimes. If you are truly as loyal as you say, why should you want to see him?”
……和国王结婚……这几个字让她呼吸急促，但珊莎依旧有些迟疑。“或许……如果我可以先见见父亲大人，和他谈谈……”
“I … I only meant …” Sansa felt her eyes grow wet. “He’s not … please, he hasn’t been … hurt, or … or …”
“造反的事？”瓦里斯伯爵提示。
“Lord Eddard has not been harmed,” the queen said.
“珊莎，你太令我失望了。”王后的眼神转为严峻，有如坚硬磐石。“我们已经告诉过你令尊的罪行，假如你真如自己所说那么忠于王室，为何还要见他？”
“But … what’s to become of him?”
“我……我只是想……”珊莎湿了眼眶。“他没事吧？……请您告诉我，他有没有……受伤，还是……还是……”
“That is a matter for the king to decide,” Grand Maester Pycelle announced ponderously.
“艾德大人毫发无伤。”王后说。
The king! Sansa blinked back her tears. Joffrey was the king now, she thought. Her gallant prince would never hurt her father, no matter what he might have done. If she went to him and pleaded for mercy, she was certain he’d listen. He had to listen, he loved her, even the queen said so. Joff would need to punish Father, the lords would expect it, but perhaps he could send him back to Winterfell, or exile him to one of the Free Cities across the narrow sea. It would only have to be for a few years. By then she and Joffrey would be married. Once she was queen, she could persuade Joff to bring Father back and grant him a pardon.
“可是……你们要如何处置他？”
Only … if Mother or Robb did anything treasonous, called the banners or refused to swear fealty or anything , it would all go wrong. Her Joffrey was good and kind, she knew it in her heart, but a king had to be stern with rebels. She had to make them understand, she had to!
“此事只有国王陛下才能决定。”派席尔国师满腹思量地宣布。
“I’ll … I’ll write the letters,” Sansa told them.
国王陛下！珊莎眨眨眼睛忍住泪水。她这才想起，如今乔佛里是国王了。无论他最后作何决定，她相信她的白马王子绝不会伤害父亲。她确信只要自己去找他，求他手下留情，他一定会听的。他怎么可能不听呢？他那么爱她，王后不也这么说？虽然小乔处罚父亲在所难免，群臣也会如此期待，但或许他能把他送回临冬城，或者将他放逐到狭海对岸的自由贸易城邦。只要他安心待个几年，等她和乔佛里成婚，一旦她贵为王后，便可劝说乔佛里赦免父亲的罪行，放他回家。
With a smile as warm as the sunrise, Cersei Lannister leaned close and kissed her gently on the cheek. “I knew you would. Joffrey will be so proud when I tell him what courage and good sense you’ve shown here today.”
可是……万一母亲和罗柏做出什么违法犯上的事，比如召集封臣举兵叛乱，或是不肯宣誓效忠，那后果可就不堪设想。虽然她心里清楚乔佛里有副高贵的好心肠，可他毕竟身为一国之君，对叛变之事非得严惩不贷，所以她一定要让母亲他们了解，她非这样做不可！
In the end, she wrote four letters. To her mother, the Lady Catelyn Stark, and to her brothers at Winterfell, and to her aunt and her grandfather as well, Lady Lysa Arryn of the Eyrie, and Lord Hoster Tully of Riverrun. By the time she had done, her fingers were cramped and stiff and stained with ink. Varys had her father’s seal. She warmed the pale white beeswax over a candle, poured it carefully, and watched as the eunuch stamped each letter with the direwolf of House Stark.
“那……那我就写吧。”珊莎告诉他们。
Jeyne Poole and all her things were gone when Ser Mandon Moore returned Sansa to the high tower of Maegor’s Holdfast. No more weeping, she thought gratefully. Yet somehow it seemed colder with Jeyne gone, even after she’d built a fire. She pulled a chair close to the hearth, took down one of her favorite books, and lost herself in the stories of Florian and Jonquil, of Lady Shella and the Rainbow Knight, of valiant Prince Aemon and his doomed love for his brother’s queen.
瑟曦·兰尼斯特露出如旭日般温煦的笑容，靠过来轻吻她的脸颊。“我知道你会的。等我告诉乔佛里你今天有多勇敢，多懂事，他一定会倍感骄傲。”
It was not until later that night, as she was drifting off to sleep, that Sansa realized she had forgotten to ask about her sister.
最后她一共写了四封信。收件人包括母亲凯特琳·史塔克夫人，她临冬城的兄弟们，以及阿姨和爷爷，也就是鹰巢城的莱莎·艾林夫人和奔流城的霍斯特·徒利公爵。待她写完，手指已经酸麻僵硬，沾满墨水。瓦里斯拿来父亲的印章，她在蜡烛上融了白色蜂蜡，小心翼翼地倒在信封口，然后看着太监用史塔克家族的冰原狼印章依次盖上。
*JON
曼登·穆尔爵士送她回到梅葛楼的高塔时，珍妮·普尔和她的东西已经没了踪影。再也不用听她哭个不休，她有些感激地想。然而少了珍妮，这里却越发显得清冷，即便她生起一炉火也一样。她拉张椅子靠近炉边，从书架上取了本她最喜欢的书，容许自己暂时躲进佛罗理安和琼琪，希拉小姐与彩虹骑士，以及英勇的伊蒙王子和他兄弟之妻注定悲剧收场的爱情故事里。
“O thor,” announced Ser Jaremy Rykker, “beyond a doubt. And this one was Jafer Flowers.” He turned the corpse over with his foot, and the dead white face stared up at the overcast sky with blue, blue eyes. “They were Ben Stark’s men, both of them.”
直到当晚准备上床的时候，珊莎才想起自己忘问妹妹的事了。
My uncle’s men , Jon thought numbly. He remembered how he’d pleaded to ride with them. Gods, I was such a green boy. If he had taken me, it might be me lying here …
第五十三章 琼恩
Jafer’s right wrist ended in the ruin of torn flesh and splintered bone left by Ghost’s jaws. His right hand was floating in a jar of vinegar back in Maester Aemon’s tower. His left hand, still at the end of his arm, was as black as his cloak.
“这是奥瑟，”杰瑞米·莱克爵士宣布，“错不了。另外那个是杰佛·佛花。”他用脚把尸体翻过来，死尸脸色惨白，蓝澄澄的双眼睁得老大，瞪着阴霾不开的天空。“他们两个都是班·史塔克手下的人。”
“Gods have mercy,” the Old Bear muttered. He swung down from his garron, handing his reins to Jon. The morning was unnaturally warm; beads of sweat dotted the Lord Commander’s broad forehead like dew on a melon. His horse was nervous, rolling her eyes, backing away from the dead men as far as her lead would allow. Jon led her off a few paces, fighting to keep her from bolting. The horses did not like the feel of this place. For that matter, neither did Jon.
他们是叔叔手下的人，琼恩木然地想。他忆起自己当初哀求与他们同去的模样。诸神保佑，我果真是个稚气未脱的孩子。假如叔叔带的是我，或许就换我躺在这儿了……
The dogs liked it least of all. Ghost had led the party here; the pack of hounds had been useless. When Bass the kennelmaster had tried to get them to take the scent from the severed hand, they had gone wild, yowling and barking, fighting to get away. Even now they were snarling and whimpering by turns, pulling at their leashes while Chett cursed them for curs.
杰佛的右臂被白灵齐腕咬断，末端只剩一团血肉模糊。他的右手掌此刻正在伊蒙师傅的塔里，悬浮于醋罐之中。至于他的左掌，虽然还好端端地接在臂膀上，却和他的斗篷一般黑。
It is only a wood , Jon told himself, and they’re only dead men . He had seen dead men before …
“诸神慈悲。”熊老喃喃道。他翻身从犁马背上跳下，把缰绳交给琼恩。这是个异常暖和的清晨，守夜人司令宽阔的额间遍布汗珠，犹如甜瓜表面的露水。他的坐骑十分局促，一边翻着白眼，一边扯着缰绳，想从死人身边退开。琼恩牵它走开几步，努力不让它挣脱奔走。马儿不喜欢此地的感觉，话说回来，琼恩自己也不喜欢。
Last night he had dreamt the Winterfell dream again. He was wandering the empty castle, searching for his father, descending into the crypts. Only this time the dream had gone further than before. In the dark he’d heard the scrape of stone on stone. When he turned he saw that the vaults were opening, one after the other. As the dead kings came stumbling from their cold black graves, Jon had woken in pitch-dark, his heart hammering. Even when Ghost leapt up on the bed to nuzzle at his face, he could not shake his deep sense of terror. He dared not go back to sleep. Instead he had climbed the Wall and walked, restless, until he saw the light of the dawn off to the east. It was only a dream. I am a brother of the Night’s Watch now, not a frightened boy .
狗们更是深恶痛绝。带领队伍到这儿的是白灵，整群猎犬根本毫无用处。之前驯兽长贝斯试着拿断手给它们闻，好让它们记住气味，结果狗群整个发狂，又吠又叫，拼死命要逃开。即便到现在，它们也依然时而咆哮时而哀嚎，用力拉扯狗链，齐特为此咒骂不已。
Samwell Tarly huddled beneath the trees, half-hidden behind the horses. His round fat face was the color of curdled milk. So far he had not lurched off to the woods to retch, but he had not so much as glanced at the dead men either. “I can’t look,” he whispered miserably.
这不过是座森林，狗儿闻到的只是尸臭罢了，琼恩这么告诉自己。他刚见过死人……
“You have to look,” Jon told him, keeping his voice low so the others would not hear. “Maester Aemon sent you to be his eyes, didn’t he? What good are eyes if they’re shut?”
就在昨夜，他又作了那个临冬城的梦。梦中他漫游在空荡荡的城堡，四处寻找父亲，最后下楼梯进了墓窖。但这次梦境并未在此结束。在黑暗中他听见石头刮碰的声音，猛一转身，只见墓穴一个个打开来，死去已久的国王纷纷由冰冷黑暗的坟中蹒跚走出。琼恩恍然惊醒，四周一片漆黑，心脏狂跳。连白灵跳上床，用嘴巴摩擦他的脸，也难减轻他心中深深的恐惧。他不敢再睡，便起身爬上长城，不安地漫步，直到东方初绽曙光。那不过是梦而已，如今我是守夜人军团的一分子，不再是容易受惊的小孩儿了。
“Yes, but … I’m such a coward, Jon.”
山姆威尔·塔利蜷缩树下，半躲在马群后。他那张圆胖的脸颜色有如酸败的牛奶。虽然他并未逃进森林上吐下泻，可也没正眼瞧过死尸。“我不敢看。”他可怜兮兮地低语。
Jon put a hand on Sam’s shoulder. “We have a dozen rangers with us, and the dogs, even Ghost. No one will hurt you, Sam. Go ahead and look. The first look is the hardest.”
“你不能不看。”琼恩对他说，一边压低声音不让别人听见。“伊蒙师傅不是派你来当他的眼睛么？眼睛若是闭上了，那还有什么用呢？”
Sam gave a tremulous nod, working up his courage with a visible effort. Slowly he swiveled his head. His eyes widened, but Jon held his arm so he could not turn away.
“话是这样说，可……琼恩，我实在是个胆小鬼。”
“Ser Jaremy,” the Old Bear asked gruffly, “Ben Stark had six men with him when he rode from the Wall. Where are the others?”
琼恩把手放到山姆肩膀。“我们身边有十二个游骑兵，还有成群的猎狗，连白灵都跟来了。山姆，没人伤得了你。去看看罢，第一眼总是最难。”
Ser Jaremy shook his head. “Would that I knew.”
山姆颤巍巍地点个头，很明显地努力鼓起勇气，然后缓缓转头。他的双眼顿时睁得老大，但琼恩抓住他的手，不让他转开。
Plainly Mormont was not pleased with that answer. “Two of our brothers butchered almost within sight of the Wall, yet your rangers heard nothing, saw nothing. Is this what the Night’s Watch has fallen to? Do we still sweep these woods?”
“杰瑞米爵士，”熊老没好气地问，“班·史塔克出长城带了六个人，其他人上哪儿去了？”
“Yes, my lord, but—”
杰瑞米爵士摇摇头。“我若是知道就好了。”
“Do we still mount watches?”
莫尔蒙对这答案显然大为不满。“两个弟兄几乎在长城的肉眼可见范围内惨遭杀害，你的游骑兵却什么也没听见，什么也没看到，难道守夜人已经怠惰到这种地步了？我们到底有没有派人扫荡森林？”
“We do, but—”
“当然是有的，大人，可是——”
“This man wears a hunting horn.” Mormont pointed at Othor. “Must I suppose that he died without sounding it? Or have your rangers all gone deaf as well as blind?”
“我们还有没有派人骑马巡逻？”
Ser Jaremy bristled, his face taut with anger. “No horn was blown, my lord, or my rangers would have heard it. I do not have sufficient men to mount as many patrols as I should like … and since Benjen was lost, we have stayed closer to the Wall than we were wont to do before, by your own command.”
“有的，可是——”
The Old Bear grunted. “Yes. Well. Be that as it may.” He made an impatient gesture. “Tell me how they died.”
“这家伙身上带着猎号，”莫尔蒙指着奥瑟说，“莫非你要我相信他临死前连一声都没吹？还是你的游骑兵不只眼睛瞎了，连耳朵也聋啦？”
Squatting beside the dead man he had named Jafer Flowers, Ser Jaremy grasped his head by the scalp. The hair came out between his fingers, brittle as straw. The knight cursed and shoved at the face with the heel of his hand. A great gash in the side of the corpse’s neck opened like a mouth, crusted with dried blood. Only a few ropes of pale tendon still attached the head to the neck. “This was done with an axe.”
杰瑞米爵士气得毛发竖立，满脸怒容。“大人，没有人吹号角，否则我的游骑兵一定会听见。如今人手不够，根本无法照我的意图仔细巡逻……更何况自从班扬失踪，我们已经缩短了巡逻范围，比以前更靠近长城——这可是大人您亲自下的令。”
“Aye,” muttered Dywen, the old forester. “Belike the axe that Othor carried, m’lord.”
熊老咕哝道：“唉，也是。那就算了罢。”他不耐烦地挥挥手。“跟我说说他们是怎么死的。”
Jon could feel his breakfast churning in his belly, but he pressed his lips together and made himself look at the second body. Othor had been a big ugly man, and he made a big ugly corpse. No axe was in evidence. Jon remembered Othor; he had been the one bellowing the bawdy song as the rangers rode out. His singing days were done. His flesh was blanched white as milk, everywhere but his hands. His hands were black like Jafer’s. Blossoms of hard cracked blood decorated the mortal wounds that covered him like a rash, breast and groin and throat. Yet his eyes were still open. They stared up at the sky, blue as sapphires.
杰瑞米爵士在杰佛·佛花身旁蹲下，揪着头皮抓起头颅。发束从他指间落下，松脆有如稻草。骑士骂了一声，伸手把脸部翻过。尸体另一侧的脖颈部位有道深深的伤口，好似一张大嘴，其中积满了干涸的血块。头脖之间仅余几条肌腱相连。“他是给斧头砍死的。”
Ser Jaremy stood. “The Wildlings have axes too.”
“没错，”老林务官戴文喃喃道，“大人，俺说就是奥瑟平日惯用的那把斧头。”
Mormont rounded on him. “So you believe this is Mance Rayder’s work? This close to the Wall?”
琼恩只觉早餐在胃里翻涌，但他强自抿紧嘴唇，逼自己朝第二具尸体望去。奥瑟生前是个高大丑陋的人，死后尸体也是又大又丑。但四下却没有斧头的踪影。琼恩还记得奥瑟；他就是那个出发前高唱低俗小调的家伙。看来他唱歌的日子是完了。他的双手和杰佛一样完全漆黑。伤口如疹子般覆盖全身，从下体到胸部再到咽喉无一幸免，上面装饰着一朵朵干裂的的血花。他的眼睛依旧睁开，蓝宝石般的珠子直瞪天空。
“Who else, my lord?”
杰瑞米爵士站起身。“野人也是有斧头的。”
Jon could have told him. He knew, they all knew, yet no man of them would say the words. The Others are only a story, a tale to make children shiver. If they ever lived at all, they are gone eight thousand years . Even the thought made him feel foolish; he was a man grown now, a black brother of the Night’s Watch, not the boy who’d once sat at Old Nan’s feet with Bran and Robb and Arya.
莫尔蒙语带挑衅地对他说：“那依你之见，这是曼斯·雷德干的好事？在离长城这么近的地方？”
Yet Lord Commander Mormont gave a snort. “If Ben Stark had come under Wildling attack a half day’s ride from Castle Black, he would have returned for more men, chased the killers through all seven hells and brought me back their heads.”
“大人，不然还有谁呢？”
“Unless he was slain as well,” Ser Jaremy insisted.
答案连琼恩都说得出。不仅他知道，大家都很清楚，但没有人愿意说出口。异鬼只是故事，用来吓小孩的传说。就算他们真的存在，也是八千年前的事。光是产生这个念头都教他觉得愚蠢：他是个成年人，是守夜人的黑衣弟兄，已非当年与布兰、罗柏和艾莉亚一同坐在老奶妈脚边的小男孩啦。
The words hurt, even now. It had been so long, it seemed folly to cling to the hope that Ben Stark was still alive, but Jon Snow was nothing if not stubborn.
但莫尔蒙司令哼了一声：“假如班·史塔克在距离黑城堡只有半天骑程的地方遭到野人攻击，他定会回来增调人马，追那些杀人犯到七层地狱，把他们的首级带来给我。”
“It has been close on half a year since Benjen left us, my lord,” Ser Jaremy went on. “The forest is vast. The Wildlings might have fallen on him anywhere. I’d wager these two were the last survivors of his party, on their way back to us … but the enemy caught them before they could reach the safety of the Wall. The corpses are still fresh, these men cannot have been dead more than a day …”
“除非连他自己也遇害。”杰瑞米爵士坚持。
“NO,” Samwell Tarly squeaked.
即使到现在，听到这些话依然令人心痛。过了这么久，期望班·史塔克还活着无异自欺欺人，但琼恩·雪诺别的没有，就是固执。
Jon was startled. Sam’s nervous, high-pitched voice was the last he would have expected to hear. The fat boy was frightened of the officers, and Ser Jaremy was not known for his patience.
“大人，班扬离开我们已快半年，”杰瑞米爵士续道，“森林广阔，随处可能遭野人偷袭。我敢打赌，这两个是他队伍最后的幸存者，本准备回来找我们……只可惜在抵达长城之前被敌人追上。你瞧，这些尸体还很新鲜，死亡时间不会超过一天……”
“I did not ask for your views, boy,” Rykker said coldly.
“不对。”山姆威尔·塔利尖声说。
“Let him speak, ser,” Jon blurted.
琼恩吓了一跳，他说什么也没料到会听见山姆紧张而高亢的话音。胖男孩向来很怕官员，而杰瑞米爵士又素以坏脾气出名。
Mormont’s eyes flicked from Sam to Jon and back again. “If the lad has something to say, I’ll hear him out. Come closer, boy. We can’t see you behind those horses.”
“小子，我可没问你意见。”莱克冷冷地说。
Sam edged past Jon and the garrons, sweating profusely. “My lord, it … it can’t be a day or … look … the blood …”
“让他说吧，爵士先生。”琼恩冲口而出。
“Yes?” Mormont growled impatiently. “Blood, what of it?”
莫尔蒙的视线从山姆飘向琼恩，然后又转向山姆：“如果那孩子有话要说，就让他说吧。小子，靠过来，躲在马后面我们可瞧不见你。”
“He soils his smallclothes at the sight of it,” Chett shouted out, and the rangers laughed.
山姆挤过琼恩和马匹，汗如雨下。“大人，不……不可能只有一天……请看……那个血……”
Sam mopped at the sweat on his brow. “You … you can see where Ghost … Jon’s direwolf … you can see where he tore off that man’s hand, and yet … the stump hasn’t bled, look …” He waved a hand. “My father … L-lord Randyll, he, he made me watch him dress animals sometimes, when … after …” Sam shook his head from side to side, his chins quivering. Now that he had looked at the bodies, he could not seem to look away. “A fresh kill … the blood would still flow, my lords. Later … later it would be clotted, like a … a jelly, thick and … and …” He looked as though he was going to be sick. “This man … look at the wrist, it’s all … crusty … dry … like …”
“嗯？”莫尔蒙不耐烦地皱眉，“血怎么样？”
Jon saw at once what Sam meant. He could see the torn veins in the dead man’s wrist, iron worms in the pale flesh. His blood was a black dust. Yet Jaremy Rykker was unconvinced. “If they’d been dead much longer than a day, they’d be ripe by now, boy. They don’t even smell.”
“他一见血就尿裤子啦。”齐特高喊，游骑兵们哄堂大笑。
Dywen, the gnarled old forester who liked to boast that he could smell snow coming on, sidled closer to the corpses and took a whiff. “Well, they’re no pansy flowers, but … m’lord has the truth of it. There’s no corpse stink.”
山姆抹抹额上的汗珠。“您……您看白灵……琼恩的冰原狼……您看它咬断手的地方，可是……断肢没有流血，您看……”他挥挥手。“家父……蓝……蓝道伯爵，他，他有时候会逼我看他处理猎物……在……之后……”山姆摇头晃脑，下巴动个不休。这会儿他真看了，视线反而离不开尸体。“刚死的猎物……大人，血还会流动。之后……之后才会凝结成块，像是……像是肉冻，浓稠的肉冻，而且……而且……”他似乎要吐了。“这个人……请看，他的手腕很……很脆……又干又脆……像是……”
“They … they aren’t rotting.” Sam pointed, his fat finger shaking only a little. “Look, there’s … there’s no maggots or … or … worms or anything … they’ve been lying here in the woods, but they … they haven’t been chewed or eaten by animals … only Ghost … otherwise they’re … they’re …”
琼恩立刻明白了山姆的意思。他可以看见死人腕部断裂的血管，活像惨白肌肉里的铁蠕虫，血也冻成黑粉末。但杰瑞米·莱克不以为然。“如果他们真死了一天以上，现在早就臭得要命。可他们一点味道也没有。”
“Untouched,” Jon said softly. “And Ghost is different. The dogs and the horses won’t go near them.”
饱经风霜的老林务官戴文最爱夸耀自己嗅觉灵敏，常说连降雪都能闻出来。这会儿他悄悄走到尸体旁边，嗅了一下。“嗯，是不怎么好闻，不过……大人说得没错，的确没有尸臭。”
The rangers exchanged glances; they could see it was true, every man of them. Mormont frowned, glancing from the corpses to the dogs. “Chett, bring the hounds closer.”
“他们……他们也没有腐烂，”山姆指给大家看，胖手指颤抖不休。“请看，他们身上没有……没有生蛆，也……也……没有其他的虫子……他们在森林里躺了这么久，却……却没有被动物撕咬或吃掉……若不是白灵……他们……”
Chett tried, cursing, yanking on the leashes, giving one animal a lick of his boot. Most of the dogs just whimpered and planted their feet. He tried dragging one. The bitch resisted, growling and squirming as if to escape her collar. Finally she lunged at him. Chett dropped the leash and stumbled backward. The dog leapt over him and bounded off into the trees.
“可说毫发无伤。”琼恩轻声道，“而且白灵和其他动物不一样。狗儿和马都不愿靠近他们的尸体。”
“This … this is all wrong,” Sam Tarly said earnestly. “The blood … there’s bloodstains on their clothes, and … and their flesh, dry and hard, but … there’s none on the ground, or … anywhere. With those … those … those …” Sam made himself swallow, took a deep breath. “With those wounds … terrible wounds … there should be blood all over. Shouldn’t there?”
游骑兵们彼此交换眼神，每个人都知道此话不假。莫尔蒙皱起眉头，将视线从尸体移到狗群。“齐特，把猎狗带过来。”
Dywen sucked at his wooden teeth. “Might be they didn’t die here. Might be someone brought ’em and left ’em for us. A warning, as like.” The old forester peered down suspiciously. “And might be I’m a fool, but I don’t know that Othor never had no blue eyes afore.”
齐特连忙照办，一边咒骂，一边拉扯狗链，还伸腿踢了狗一脚。但猎狗们多半呜咽着，打定主意不肯挪动。他试着强拉一只母狗，结果它拼命顽抗，又吼又扭，企图挣脱项圈，最后竟朝他扑去。齐特丢下绳子踉跄后退，狗跳过他跑进森林去了。
Ser Jaremy looked startled. “Neither did Flowers,” he blurted, turning to stare at the dead man.
“这……这很不对劲啊，”山姆·塔利急切地说，“看看这血……他们衣服上有血迹，而且……而且他们的皮肤如此干硬，可……可地上完全没有血迹……这附近一丁点儿都没有。照说他们……他们……他们……”山姆努力吞了口唾沫，深吸一口气。“照说他们伤口那么深……那么可怕，鲜血应该溅得到处都是，对不对？”
A silence fell over the wood. For a moment all they heard was Sam’s heavy breathing and the wet sound of Dywen sucking on his teeth. Jon squatted beside Ghost.
戴文吸了吸他的木假牙。“弄不好他们不是死在这里。弄不好是被人搬来弃尸，当作警告什么的。”老林务官满腹狐疑地往下瞧。“或许是俺弄不清，可俺记得奥瑟从来就不是蓝眼睛呐。”
“Burn them,” someone whispered. One of the rangers; Jon could not have said who. “Yes, burn them,” a second voice urged.
杰瑞米爵士似乎大为震惊。“佛花也不是。”他脱口便道，一边转头看着两个死人。
The Old Bear gave a stubborn shake of his head. “Not yet. I want Maester Aemon to have a look at them. We’ll bring them back to the Wall.”
寂静笼罩森林，一时之间大家只听见山姆沉重的呼吸和戴文吸吮假牙的濡湿声。琼恩在白灵身边蹲下。
Some commands are more easily given than obeyed. They wrapped the dead men in cloaks, but when Hake and Dywen tried to tie one onto a horse, the animal went mad, screaming and rearing, lashing out with its hooves, even biting at Ketter when he ran to help. The rangers had no better luck with the other garrons; not even the most placid wanted any part of these burdens. In the end they were forced to hack off branches and fashion crude slings to carry the corpses back on foot. It was well past midday by the time they started back.
“烧了他们罢。”有人小声说。是某位游骑兵，但琼恩听不出是谁。“是啊，烧了罢。”又一个声音在催促。
“I will have these woods searched,” Mormont commanded Ser Jaremy as they set out. “Every tree, every rock, every bush, and every foot of muddy ground within ten leagues of here. Use all the men you have, and if you do not have enough, borrow hunters and foresters from the stewards. If Ben and the others are out here, dead or alive, I will have them found. And if there is anyone else in these woods, I will know of it. You are to track them and take them, alive if possible. Is that understood?”
熊老固执地摇摇头。“还不行。我得先请伊蒙师傅看看。咱们把他们带回长城去。”
“It is, my lord,” Ser Jaremy said. “It will be done.”
有些命令下达容易，执行却难。他们用斗篷裹起尸首，然而当哈克和戴文试图将其中一具绑上马时，马儿整个发了狂，它尖叫着后足站立，伸腿狂踢，跑去帮忙的凯特反被咬伤。游骑兵试了其他犁马，同样不听使唤；即便最温驯的马也拼死不愿与尸体有任何接触。最后迫不得已，人们只好砍下树枝，做成粗陋的拖拉架，动身返回时，已经到了下午。
After that, Mormont rode in silence, brooding. Jon followed close behind him; as the Lord Commander’s steward, that was his place. The day was grey, damp, overcast, the sort of day that made you wish for rain. No wind stirred the wood; the air hung humid and heavy, and Jon’s clothes clung to his skin. It was warm. Too warm. The Wall was weeping copiously, had been weeping for days, and sometimes Jon even imagined it was shrinking.
“派人把这片森林搜个彻底，”启程之前，莫尔蒙命令杰瑞米爵士，“方圆十里格内每一棵树、每一块石头、每一丛矮树和每一寸泥地都必须翻找一遍。把你手下所有的人都派出来，如果人手不够，就跟事务官借调猎人和林务官。假如班和他的手下就在其中，不论死活，你都必须找到。假如森林里有‘其他人’，也一定要报告，你必须负责追踪并逮捕他们，能活捉最好，知道了吗？”
The old men called this weather spirit summer , and said it meant the season was giving up its ghosts at last. After this the cold would come, they warned, and a long summer always meant a long winter. This summer had lasted ten years. Jon had been a babe in arms when it began.
“知道了，大人。”杰瑞米爵士说，“我一定办妥。”
Ghost ran with them for a time and then vanished among the trees. Without the direwolf, Jon felt almost naked. He found himself glancing at every shadow with unease. Unbidden, he thought back on the tales that Old Nan used to tell them, when he was a boy at Winterfell. He could almost hear her voice again, and the click-click-click of her needles. In that darkness, the Others came riding , she used to say, dropping her voice lower and lower. Cold and dead they were, and they hated iron and fire and the touch of the sun, and every living creature with hot blood in its veins. Holdfasts and cities and kingdoms of men all fell before them, as they moved south on pale dead horses, leading hosts of the slain. They fed their dead servants on the flesh of human children …
打那之后，莫尔蒙默默地骑马沉思。琼恩紧随在后——身为司令的私人事务官，这是他的位置。天色灰暗，弥漫水气，阴霾不开，正是那种令人急盼降雨的天气。林中无风，空气潮湿而沉重，琼恩的衣服黏紧皮肤。天气很温暖。太温暖了。长城连日以来“泪”如泉涌，有时候琼恩不禁想像它正在萎缩。
When he caught his first glimpse of the Wall looming above the tops of an ancient gnarled oak, Jon was vastly relieved. Mormont reined up suddenly and turned in his saddle. “Tarly,” he barked, “come here.”
老人们管这种天气叫“鬼夏”，传说这意味着夏季的鬼魂终于逃脱束缚，四处飘荡。他们还警告说，在这之后，酷寒便会降临，而长夏之后总是漫长的冬季。这次的夏天已经持续了十年，夏季刚开始时，琼恩还是大人怀抱里的小孩儿。
Jon saw the start of fright on Sam’s face as he lumbered up on his mare; doubtless he thought he was in trouble. “You’re fat but you’re not stupid, boy,” the Old Bear said gruffly. “You did well back there. And you, Snow.”
白灵跟着他们跑了一段，然后消失在树林。身边少了冰原狼，琼恩觉得自己赤裸裸的。他带着怀疑的目光，不安地瞄着每一处阴影。他不由得想起自己还是个小男孩时，临冬城的老奶妈给他们讲过的故事。她的嗓音和缝衣针的“嗟嗟”声犹在耳际。在一片黑暗之中，异鬼骑马到来，这是她最拿手的开头，之后她不断压低声音，他们浑身冰冷，散发着死亡的气息，痛恨钢铁、烈火和阳光，以及所有流淌着温热血液的生命。他们骑着惨白的死马，率领在战争中遇害的亡灵大军一路南下，横扫农村、城市和王国。他们还拿人类婴儿的肉来饲养手下的死灵仆役……
Sam blushed a vivid crimson and tripped over his own tongue as he tried to stammer out a courtesy. Jon had to smile.
当琼恩终于自一棵扭曲的老橡树枝间瞥见远方高耸的长城时，不禁感到如释重负。这时莫尔蒙突然勒住缰绳，在马鞍上转过头。“塔利，”他喊道，“你过来。”
When they emerged from under the trees, Mormont spurred his tough little garron to a trot. Ghost came streaking out from the woods to meet them, licking his chops, his muzzle red from prey. High above, the men on the Wall saw the column approaching. Jon heard the deep, throaty call of the watchman’s great horn, calling out across the miles; a single long blast that shuddered through the trees and echoed off the ice.
山姆笨重地爬下马，琼恩看见他脸上的恐惧之色：他想必认为自己有麻烦了。“小子，你胖归胖，人倒是不笨。”熊老粗声说，“刚才干得不错。雪诺，你也是。”
UUUUUUUoooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo .
山姆立刻满面通红，急忙想要道谢，舌头却不听使唤。琼恩忍不住笑了。
The sound faded slowly to silence. One blast meant rangers returning, and Jon thought, I was a ranger for one day, at least. Whatever may come, they cannot take that away from me .
出森林后，莫尔蒙双脚一蹬，驱使他那匹健壮的小犁马向前疾驰。白灵自林间蹿出来与他们会合。他舔着下巴，口鼻沾满猎物的鲜血。远处，居高临下的长城守卫发现渐近的队伍，接着那低沉浑厚的号角便响彻原野；那是一声长长的巨鸣，颤抖着穿越树林，回荡于冰原之上。
Bowen Marsh was waiting at the first gate as they led their garrons through the icy tunnel. The Lord Steward was red-faced and agitated. “My lord,” he blurted at Mormont as he swung open the iron bars, “there’s been a bird, you must come at once.”
喔喔喔喔喔喔喔呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜
“What is it, man?” Mormont said gruffly.
号音渐弱，终归寂静。一声号角代表兄弟归来，琼恩心想，起码我也当了一天的游骑兵兄弟。无论将来如何，没有人能否认。
Curiously, Marsh glanced at Jon before he answered. “Maester Aemon has the letter. He’s waiting in your solar.”
当他们牵马穿过冰封隧道时，发现波文·马尔锡正站在第一道大门内。总务长满脸通红，显得焦虑不安。“大人，”他一边拉开铁栅门，一边迫不及待地对莫尔蒙说，“有只鸟儿捎信来，请您立刻来一趟。”
“Very well. Jon, see to my horse, and tell Ser Jaremy to put the dead men in a storeroom until the maester is ready for them.” Mormont strode away grumbling.
“嗯？到底怎么回事？”莫尔蒙不耐烦地问。
As they led their horses back to the stable, Jon was uncomfortably aware that people were watching him. Ser Alliser Thorne was drilling his boys in the yard, but he broke off to stare at Jon, a faint half smile on his lips. One-armed Donal Noye stood in the door of the armory. “The gods be with you, Snow,” he called out.
奇怪的是，马尔锡竟先瞄了琼恩一眼，然后才作答：“信在伊蒙师傅手中，他在您的书房等您。”
Something’s wrong , Jon thought. Something’s very wrong .
“好罢。琼恩，马就交给你了。告诉杰瑞米爵士把尸体先放进储藏室，等学士来处理。”莫尔蒙咕哝着跨步离去。
The dead men were carried to one of the storerooms along the base of the Wall, a dark cold cell chiseled from the ice and used to keep meat and grain and sometimes even beer. Jon saw that Mormont’s horse was fed and watered and groomed before he took care of his own. Afterward he sought out his friends. Grenn and Toad were on watch, but he found Pyp in the common hall. “What’s happened?” he asked.
琼恩和其他人牵着坐骑回到马厩时，他很不自在地发觉大家都盯着他瞧。艾里沙·索恩爵士正在校场训练新兵，但他也暂停手边工作，瞪着琼恩，嘴上挂着一抹微笑。独臂的唐纳·诺伊站在兵器库门口。“雪诺，愿诸神与你同在。”他喊道。
Pyp lowered his voice. “The king’s dead.”
一定发生了什么事，琼恩心想，非常不好的事。
Jon was stunned. Robert Baratheon had looked old and fat when he visited Winterfell, yet he’d seemed hale enough, and there’d been no talk of illness. “How can you know?”
两具死尸被抬进长城脚下的一间储藏室内，那是个从冰墙里凿出的阴冷房间，专门用来存放肉类和谷物，有时连啤酒也拿来这里。琼恩先喂莫尔蒙的马吃草喝水，梳过毛后，方才去照料自己的坐骑。之后他去找自己那伙朋友，葛兰和陶德正在站岗，但他在大厅里找到派普。“出什么事了？”他问。
“One of the guards overheard Clydas reading the letter to Maester Aemon.” Pyp leaned close. “Jon, I’m sorry. He was your father’s friend, wasn’t he?”
派普压低声音。“国王死了。”
“They were as close as brothers, once.” Jon wondered if Joffrey would keep his father as the King’s Hand. It did not seem likely. That might mean Lord Eddard would return to Winterfell, and his sisters as well. He might even be allowed to visit them, with Lord Mormont’s permission. It would be good to see Arya’s grin again and to talk with his father. I will ask him about my mother , he resolved. I am a man now, it is past time he told me. Even if she was a whore, I don’t care, I want to know .
琼恩大感震惊。劳勃·拜拉席恩上次来访临冬城，虽然那模样既老又胖，却似乎很健康，也没听人说他得了什么病。“你怎么知道？”
“I heard Hake say the dead men were your uncle’s,” Pyp said.
“有个守卫偷听到克莱达斯读信给伊蒙师傅听，”派普靠过来。“琼恩，我很遗憾。他是你老爸的好朋友，对不对？”
“Yes,” Jon replied. “Two of the six he took with him. They’d been dead a long time, only … the bodies are queer.”
“他们情同手足。”琼恩暗忖乔佛里是否会继续让父亲担任御前首相一职。他觉得不大可能。也就是说，艾德公爵即将返回临冬城，还有他的两个妹妹。假如他能得到莫尔蒙大人的允许，说不定还可以去探望他们。能再见到艾莉亚机灵的笑容，并和父亲谈谈，一定会是件很棒的事。到时候我定要问他母亲的事，他下定决心，如今我已长大成人，说什么他都该告诉我了。即便她是个妓女我也不在乎，我一定要知道。
“Queer?” Pyp was all curiosity. “How queer?”
“我听哈克说，那两个死人是你叔叔的部下。”派普道。
“Sam will tell you.” Jon did not want to talk of it. “I should see if the Old Bear has need of me.”
“是啊，”琼恩回答，“他带去的那六个人中的两个。他们死了好长一段时间，只是……尸体有些古怪。”
He walked to the Lord Commander’s Tower alone, with a curious sense of apprehension. The brothers on guard eyed him solemnly as he approached. “The Old Bear’s in his solar,” one of them announced. “He was asking for you.”
“古怪？”派普一听，兴致就来了。“怎么个古怪法？”
Jon nodded. He should have come straight from the stable. He climbed the tower steps briskly. He wants wine or a fire in his hearth, that’s all , he told himself.
“去问山姆吧，”琼恩不想谈这个。“我该去照顾熊老了。”
When he entered the solar, Mormont’s raven screamed at him. “Corn!” the bird shrieked. “Corn! Corn! Corn!”
他独自走向司令塔，心里有种莫名的焦虑。守门的弟兄们肃穆地看他走近。“熊老在书房里，”其中一人宣布，“他正要找你。”
“Don’t you believe it, I just fed him,” the Old Bear growled. He was seated by the window, reading a letter. “Bring me a cup of wine, and pour one for yourself.”
琼恩点点头。他应该直接从马厩过来的。他快步爬上高塔楼梯，一边告诉自己：司令他要的不过是一杯好酒或炉里的暖火罢了。
“For myself, my lord?”
一进书房，莫尔蒙的乌鸦便朝他尖叫。“玉米！”鸟儿厉声喊道，“玉米！玉米！玉米！”
Mormont lifted his eyes from the letter to stare at Jon. There was pity in that look; he could taste it. “You heard me.”
“别信他。我刚喂过哪。”熊老咕哝着。他坐在窗边，正读着信。“给我弄杯酒来，你自己也倒上一杯。”
Jon poured with exaggerated care, vaguely aware that he was drawing out the act. When the cups were filled, he would have no choice but to face whatever was in that letter. Yet all too soon, they were filled. “Sit, boy,” Mormont commanded him. “Drink.”
“大人，我也要？”
Jon remained standing. “It’s my father, isn’t it?”
莫尔蒙将视线自信上抬起，瞪着琼恩。那眼神里充满怜悯，他感觉得出来。“你没听错。”
The Old Bear tapped the letter with a finger. “Your father and the king,” he rumbled. “I won’t lie to you, it’s grievous news. I never thought to see another king, not at my age, with Robert half my years and strong as a bull.” He took a gulp of wine. “They say the king loved to hunt. The things we love destroy us every time, lad. Remember that. My son loved that young wife of his. Vain woman. If not for her, he would never have thought to sell those poachers.”
琼恩格外小心地斟酒，隐约明白自己是在拖延时间。等酒杯倒满，他就别无选择，不得不面对信中之事了。即便如此，酒杯却很快就满了。“孩子，坐下。”莫尔蒙命令他。“喝罢。”
Jon could scarcely follow what he was saying. “My lord, I don’t understand. What’s happened to my father?”
琼恩站住不动。“是我父亲的事，对不对？”
“I told you to sit,” Mormont grumbled. “Sit,” the raven screamed. “And have a drink, damn you. That’s a command, Snow.”
熊老用一根指头弹弹信纸。“是你父亲和国王的事。”他朗声说，“我也不瞒你，信上写的都是坏消息。我本以为自己这么大把年纪，劳勃的岁数只有我的一半，又壮得像头牛似的，说什么也没机会碰上新国王。”他灌了口酒。“据说国王爱打猎。我告诉你，孩子，我们爱什么，到头来就会毁在什么上面。给我记清楚了。我儿子爱死了他的年轻老婆。那个爱慕虚荣的女人，要不是为了她，他也不会把脑筋动到盗猎者头上去。”
Jon sat, and took a sip of wine.
琼恩根本不明白他在说什么。“司令大人，我不懂。我父亲到底怎么了？”
“Lord Eddard has been imprisoned. He is charged with treason. It is said he plotted with Robert’s brothers to deny the throne to Prince Joffrey.”
“我不是叫你坐下么？”莫尔蒙咕哝道。“坐下！”乌鸦尖叫。“去你的，把酒喝了。雪诺，这是命令。”
“No,” Jon said at once. “That couldn’t be. My father would never betray the king!”
琼恩坐下，啜了一口酒。
“Be that as it may,” said Mormont. “It is not for me to say. Nor for you.”
“艾德大人目前人在狱中。他被控叛国，信上说他与劳勃的两个弟弟共谋夺取乔佛里的王位。”
“But it’s a lie,” Jon insisted. How could they think his father was a traitor, had they all gone mad? Lord Eddard Stark would never dishonor himself … would he?
“不可能！”琼恩立刻说，“绝不可能！父亲他说什么也不会背叛国王！”
He fathered a bastard , a small voice whispered inside him. Where was the honor in that? And your mother, what of her? He will not even speak her name .
“是真的也好，假的也罢，”莫尔蒙道，“总之轮不到我来讲。当然，更轮不到你说。”
“My lord, what will happen to him? Will they kill him?”
“可这是谎言。”琼恩坚持。他们怎么能把父亲当成叛徒？难道他们都疯了？艾德·史塔克公爵最不可能做的，就是玷污自身名节之事……是吧？
“As to that, I cannot say, lad. I mean to send a letter. I knew some of the king’s councillors in my youth. Old Pycelle, Lord Stannis, Ser Barristan … Whatever your father has done, or hasn’t done, he is a great lord. He must be allowed to take the black and join us here. Gods knows, we need men of Lord Eddard’s ability.”
那他怎么还有个私生子？一个小小的声音在琼恩心里低语，这有何荣誉可言？还有你母亲啊，她怎么样了？他连她的名字都不肯讲。
Jon knew that other men accused of treason had been allowed to redeem their honor on the Wall in days past. Why not Lord Eddard? His father here . That was a strange thought, and strangely uncomfortable. It would be a monstrous injustice to strip him of Winterfell and force him to take the black, and yet if it meant his life …
“大人，他会怎么样？他们会杀他吗？”
And would Joffrey allow it? He remembered the prince at Winterfell, the way he’d mocked Robb and Ser Rodrik in the yard. Jon himself he had scarcely even noticed; bastards were beneath even his contempt. “My lord, will the king listen to you?”
“孩子，这我就说不准了。我打算写封信去。我年轻时认识几位国王的重臣，像是老派席尔、史坦尼斯大人、巴利斯坦爵士……无论你父亲有没有做这些，他都是个了不得的领主。一定要让他有穿上黑衣加入我们的机会。天知道我们有多需要像艾德大人这么有才干的人。”
The Old Bear shrugged. “A boy king … I imagine he’ll listen to his mother. A pity the dwarf isn’t with them. He’s the lad’s uncle, and he saw our need when he visited us. It was a bad thing, your lady mother taking him captive—”
过去，被控叛国的人的确有到长城赎罪的先例，这琼恩知道。为什么艾德大人不行呢？父亲大人会来这里？真是个怪异的念头，而且不知怎地令人十分不安。夺走他的临冬城，强迫他穿上黑衣，这是何等的不公不义啊？然而，假如他能因此逃过一劫……
“Lady Stark is not my mother,” Jon reminded him sharply. Tyrion Lannister had been a friend to him. If Lord Eddard was killed, she would be as much to blame as the queen. “My lord, what of my sisters? Arya and Sansa, they were with my father, do you know—”
可乔佛里会答应吗？他忆起王太子在临冬城时，是如何在校场上嘲弄罗柏和罗德利克爵士。他倒是没注意琼恩；对他而言，私生子太过微贱，连被他轻蔑都不配。“大人，国王会听您的话吗？”
“Pycelle makes no mention of them, but doubtless they’ll be treated gently. I will ask about them when I write.” Mormont shook his head. “This could not have happened at a worse time. If ever the realm needed a strong king … there are dark days and cold nights ahead, I feel it in my bones …” He gave Jon a long shrewd look. “I hope you are not thinking of doing anything stupid, boy.”
熊老耸耸肩。“国王还是个孩子……我看他会听母亲的话罢。可惜那侏儒不在他们身边。他是那孩子的舅舅，也亲眼目睹我们亟需援助的迫切。你母亲大人就那样把他抓起来，实在是不妥……”
He’s my father , Jon wanted to say, but he knew that Mormont would not want to hear it. His throat was dry. He made himself take another sip of wine.
“史塔克夫人不是我母亲。”琼恩语气锐利地提醒他。提利昂·兰尼斯特待他如友。倘若艾德大人当真遇害，她和王后要负同样的责任。“大人，我的妹妹们呢？艾莉亚和珊莎都跟我父亲在一起，您可知道——”
“Your duty is here now,” the Lord Commander reminded him. “Your old life ended when you took the black.” His bird made a raucous echo. “Black.” Mormont took no notice. “Whatever they do in King’s Landing is none of our concern.” When Jon did not answer, the old man finished his wine and said, “You’re free to go. I’ll have no further need of you today. On the morrow you can help me write that letter.”
“派席尔信上没说，但相信她们定会受到妥善照顾。我在回信中会问问她们的情形。”莫尔蒙摇摇头。“什么时候不好，偏偏挑这种时候。王国正需要一个强有力的统治者……眼看黑暗和寒夜就要来临，我这身老骨头都感觉得到……”他意味深长地看了琼恩一眼。“小子，我希望你别做傻事。”
Jon did not remember standing or leaving the solar. The next he knew, he was descending the tower steps, thinking, This is my father, my sisters, how can it be none of my concern.
可他是我父亲啊，琼恩想说，但他知道说给莫尔蒙听也没用。他只觉喉咙干燥，便逼自己又喝了口酒。
Outside, one of the guards looked at him and said, “Be strong, boy. The gods are cruel.”
“如今你的职责所在是这里。”司令提醒他。“从你穿上黑衣那一刻起，过去的你便已经死去。”他的鸟儿粗声应和，“黑衣。”莫尔蒙不加理会。“不管君临发生了什么，都与我们无关。”老人眼看琼恩不答话，便将酒一饮而尽，然后说，“你可以走了。我今天都用不着你，明天你再来帮我写信罢。”
They know , Jon realized. “My father is no traitor,” he said hoarsely. Even the words stuck in his throat, as if to choke him. The wind was rising, and it seemed colder in the yard than it had when he’d gone in. Spirit summer was drawing to an end.
琼恩恍如梦中，他不记得自己站起，更不记得如何离开书房。等他回过神，自己正一边走下高塔楼梯，一边想：出事的是我父亲和我妹妹，怎么可能与我无关呢？
The rest of the afternoon passed as if in a dream. Jon could not have said where he walked, what he did, who he spoke with. Ghost was with him, he knew that much. The silent presence of the direwolf gave him comfort. The girls do not even have that much , he thought. Their wolves might have kept them safe, but Lady is dead and Nymeria’s lost, they’re all alone .
到了外面，一名守卫看着他说：“小子，坚强点。诸神很残酷的。”
A north wind had begun to blow by the time the sun went down. Jon could hear it skirling against the Wall and over the icy battlements as he went to the common hall for the evening meal. Hobb had cooked up a venison stew, thick with barley, onions, and carrots. When he spooned an extra portion onto Jon’s plate and gave him the crusty heel of the bread, he knew what it meant. He knows . He looked around the hall, saw heads turn quickly, eyes politely averted. They all know .
琼恩这才明白，原来他们都知道。“我父亲不是叛徒。”他哑着嗓子说。连这番话也卡在喉咙里，仿佛要噎死他。风势转强，与先前相比，广场上似乎更冷了。鬼夏俨然已近尾声。
His friends rallied to him. “We asked the septon to light a candle for your father,” Matthar told him. “It’s a lie, we all know it’s a lie, even Grenn knows it’s a lie,” Pyp chimed in. Grenn nodded, and Sam clasped Jon’s hand, “You’re my brother now, so he’s my father too,” the fat boy said. “If you want to go out to the weirwoods and pray to the old gods, I’ll go with you.”
接下来的大半个下午，就如一场梦般浮过。琼恩不知道自己去过什么地方，做过什么事，跟什么人讲过话。白灵跟在身边，只有这点他还知道。冰原狼沉默的存在给了他一点稍微的安慰。可妹妹她们连这点安慰都没有，他想。小狼原本可以保护她们，然而淑女已死，娜梅莉亚又行踪成谜，她们都是孤身一人啊。
The weirwoods were beyond the Wall, yet he knew Sam meant what he said. They are my brothers , he thought. As much as Robb and Bran and Rickon …
日落时分，吹起一阵北风。前往大厅吃晚餐时，琼恩听见它袭上长城，越过冰砌高墙的尖利声响。哈布煮了大锅的鹿肉浓汤，里面有大麦、洋葱和胡萝卜。当他特别多舀了一匙放进琼恩盘子里，又给了他面包最香脆的部分时，他立刻明白这是什么意思。他也知道。琼恩环顾大厅，看见一个个赶忙别开的头，一只只礼貌垂下的眼睛。他们通通都知道。
And then he heard the laughter, sharp and cruel as a whip, and the voice of Ser Alliser Thorne. “Not only a bastard, but a traitor’s bastard,” he was telling the men around him.
他的朋友们簇拥过来。“我们请修士为你父亲点了根蜡烛。”梅沙告诉他。“他们骗人，我们都知道他们骗人，连葛兰都知道他们说谎。”派普插进来。葛兰点点头，接着山姆握住琼恩的手。“你我现在是兄弟，所以他也是我的父亲。”胖男孩说，“如果你想到鱼梁木树林里去向旧神祷告，我就陪你去。”
In the blink of an eye, Jon had vaulted onto the table, dagger in his hand. Pyp made a grab for him, but he wrenched his leg away, and then he was sprinting down the table and kicking the bowl from Ser Alliser’s hand. Stew went flying everywhere, spattering the brothers. Thorne recoiled. People were shouting, but Jon Snow did not hear them. He lunged at Ser Alliser’s face with the dagger, slashing at those cold onyx eyes, but Sam threw himself between them and before Jon could get around him, Pyp was on his back clinging like a monkey, and Grenn was grabbing his arm while Toad wrenched the knife from his fingers.
鱼梁木树林远在长城之外，但他知道山姆并非说空话。他们真是我的兄弟啊，他心想，就和罗柏、布兰和瑞肯一样……
Later, much later, after they had marched him back to his sleeping cell, Mormont came down to see him, raven on his shoulder. “I told you not to do anything stupid, boy,” the Old Bear said. “Boy,” the bird chorused. Mormont shook his head, disgusted. “And to think I had high hopes for you.”
就在这时，他听见艾里沙·索恩爵士的笑声，锐利、残忍，有如皮鞭抽打。“原来他不但是个野种，还是个卖国贼的野种哩。”他正忙不迭地告诉身边的人。
They took his knife and his sword and told him he was not to leave his cell until the high officers met to decide what was to be done with him. And then they placed a guard outside his door to make certain he obeyed. His friends were not allowed to see him, but the Old Bear did relent and permit him Ghost, so he was not utterly alone.
只一眨眼功夫，琼恩便已跃上长桌，匕首在手。派普想抓住他，但他猛地抽开腿，跳到桌子彼端，踢翻艾里沙爵士手中的碗。肉汤飞溅，洒得附近弟兄一身。索恩向后退开。周围喊声四起，然而琼恩什么也听不见。他擎着匕首朝艾里沙爵士那张脸扑去，对着那双冰冷的玛瑙色眼睛猛砍。可他还来不及冲到对方身边，山姆便挡在两人中间，接着派普像猴子似地跳到他背上紧抓不放，葛兰抓住他的手，陶德则拨开手指，拿走匕首。
“My father is no traitor,” he told the direwolf when the rest had gone. Ghost looked at him in silence. Jon slumped against the wall, hands around his knees, and stared at the candle on the table beside his narrow bed. The flame flickered and swayed, the shadows moved around him, the room seemed to grow darker and colder. I will not sleep tonight , Jon thought.
后来，过了很久，在他们把他押回寝室之后，莫尔蒙下楼来见他，乌鸦停在肩上。“小子，我不是叫你别做傻事么？”熊老说。“小子！”乌鸦也附和。莫尔蒙厌恶地摇摇头。“我本来对你寄予厚望，结果却是这样。”
Yet he must have dozed. When he woke, his legs were stiff and cramped and the candle had long since burned out. Ghost stood on his hind legs, scrabbling at the door. Jon was startled to see how tall he’d grown. “Ghost, what is it?” he called softly. The direwolf turned his head and looked down at him, baring his fangs in a silent snarl. Has he gone mad? Jon wondered. “It’s me, Ghost,” he murmured, trying not to sound afraid. Yet he was trembling, violently. When had it gotten so cold?
他们搜走他的短刀和佩剑，叫他待在房里，不得离开，直到高层官员决定如何处置。他们还派了一个人在门外看守，以确保他遵守命令。他的朋友们也不准前来探视，但熊老总算网开一面，允许白灵跟他待在一起，所以他不至于完全孤独。
Ghost backed away from the door. There were deep gouges where he’d raked the wood. Jon watched him with mounting disquiet. “There’s someone out there, isn’t there?” he whispered. Crouching, the direwolf crept backward, white fur rising on the back of his neck. The guard , he thought, they left a man to guard my door, Ghost smells him through the door, that’s all it is .
“我父亲不是叛徒。”众人离去之后，他对冰原狼说。白灵静静地看着他。琼恩双手抱膝，颓然靠在墙上，盯着窄床边桌子上的蜡烛。烛焰摇曳闪动，影子在他周围晃个不休，房间似乎更显阴暗，也更冰冷。我今晚绝对不睡，琼恩心想。
Slowly, Jon pushed himself to his feet. He was shivering uncontrollably, wishing he still had a sword. Three quick steps brought him to the door. He grabbed the handle and pulled it inward. The creak of the hinges almost made him jump.
然而他多半还是打了瞌睡吧。醒来时只觉双腿僵硬，酸麻无比，蜡烛也早已燃尽。白灵后脚站立，前脚扒着房门。琼恩看它突然间变得那么高，吓了一跳。“白灵，怎么了？”他轻声唤道。冰原狼转过头，向下看着他，露出利齿，无声地咆哮。它疯了吗？琼恩暗忖。“白灵，是我啊。”他喃喃低语，试图遮掩声音里的恐惧。可另一方面，他又在不由自主地剧烈颤抖。什么时候变得这么冷？
His guard was sprawled bonelessly across the narrow steps, looking up at him. Looking up at him, even though he was lying on his stomach. His head had been twisted completely around.
白灵从门边退开，木门被他刨出深深的爪痕。琼恩看着它，心中的不安节节升高。“外头有人，是吧？”他轻声说。冰原狼四肢贴地向后爬开，脖颈的白毛根根竖立。一定是那个守卫，他心想，他们派一个人留下看守，看来白灵不喜欢他的味道。
It can’t be , Jon told himself. This is the Lord Commander’s Tower, it’s guarded day and night, this couldn’t happen, it’s a dream, I’m having a nightmare .
琼恩缓缓起身。他完全无法克制地发着抖，心里希望剑还在手中。上前三步，他来到门边，握住门把往里拉，只听铰链一阵嘎吱，差点没吓他跳起来。
Ghost slid past him, out the door. The wolf started up the steps, stopped, looked back at Jon. That was when he heard it; the soft scrape of a boot on stone, the sound of a latch turning. The sounds came from above. From the Lord Commander’s chambers.
守卫软绵绵地横躺在狭窄的过道上，头朝上看他。头朝上看他！腹朝下趴地。他的头被整整扭了一百八十度。
A nightmare this might be, yet it was no dream.
不可能，琼恩对自己说，这是司令大人的居塔，日夜都有人看守，绝不可能发生这种事，我一定是在作梦，我在作噩梦。
The guard’s sword was in its sheath. Jon knelt and worked it free. The heft of steel in his fist made him bolder. He moved up the steps, Ghost padding silently before him. Shadows lurked in every turn of the stair. Jon crept up warily, probing any suspicious darkness with the point of his sword.
白灵从他身边溜到门外，朝楼上走去，途中停下脚步，回头看着琼恩。就在这时，他听见靴子在石板上的摩擦，以及门闩打开的响动。声音是从楼上传来的，从总司令的房间传来的。
Suddenly he heard the shriek of Mormont’s raven. “Corn,” the bird was screaming. “Corn, corn, corn, corn, corn, corn.” Ghost bounded ahead, and Jon came scrambling after. The door to Mormont’s solar was wide open. The direwolf plunged through. Jon stopped in the doorway, blade in hand, giving his eyes a moment to adjust. Heavy drapes had been pulled across the windows, and the darkness was black as ink. “Who’s there?” he called out.
这或许是一场噩梦，但他绝非置身梦境。
Then he saw it, a shadow in the shadows, sliding toward the inner door that led to Mormont’s sleeping cell, a man-shape all in black, cloaked and hooded … but beneath the hood, its eyes shone with an icy blue radiance …
守卫的剑还在鞘里。琼恩俯身抽出，武器在手，他的胆子也大了起来。他步上台阶，白灵无声地当着前锋。楼梯的每个转角都有阴影潜伏。琼恩小心翼翼地前进，一遇可疑暗处，便用剑尖捅刺两下。
Ghost leapt. Man and wolf went down together with neither scream nor snarl, rolling, smashing into a chair, knocking over a table laden with papers. Mormont’s raven was flapping overhead, screaming, “Corn, corn, corn, corn.” Jon felt as blind as Maester Aemon. Keeping the wall to his back, he slid toward the window and ripped down the curtain. Moonlight flooded the solar. He glimpsed black hands buried in white fur, swollen dark fingers tightening around his direwolf’s throat. Ghost was twisting and snapping, legs flailing in the air, but he could not break free.
突然，他听到莫尔蒙乌鸦的尖叫。“玉米！”鸟儿扯着嗓门喊，“玉米！玉米！玉米！玉米！玉米！玉米！”白灵向前窜去，琼恩也快步登上楼梯。莫尔蒙书房的门大敞。冰原狼冲了进去。琼恩站在门口，手握利剑，以让眼睛适应黑暗。厚重的垂帘盖住窗户，房里黑暗如墨。“是谁？”他叫道。
Jon had no time to be afraid. He threw himself forward, shouting, bringing down the longsword with all his weight behind it. Steel sheared through sleeve and skin and bone, yet the sound was wrong somehow. The smell that engulfed him was so queer and cold he almost gagged. He saw arm and hand on the floor, black fingers wriggling in a pool of moonlight. Ghost wrenched free of the other hand and crept away, red tongue lolling from his mouth.
然后他看见了：一个阴影中的阴影，一个全身漆黑的人形，身披斗篷、戴着兜帽，正朝莫尔蒙卧室的门滑曳过去……但在兜帽下面，那双眼睛却闪着冰冷的蓝芒。
The hooded man lifted his pale moon face, and Jon slashed at it without hesitation. The sword laid the intruder open to the bone, taking off half his nose and opening a gash cheek to cheek under those eyes, eyes, eyes like blue stars burning. Jon knew that face. Othor , he thought, reeling back. Gods, he’s dead, he’s dead, I saw him dead .
白灵凌空一跃，人狼同时扑倒，却无尖叫，亦无咆哮。他们连翻带滚，撞碎椅子，碰倒堆满纸张的书桌。莫尔蒙的乌鸦在空中振翅飞舞，一边尖叫：“玉米！玉米！玉米！玉米！”在这里面，琼恩觉得自己像伊蒙师傅一样目不视物。于是他背贴墙走到窗边，伸手扯下帘幕。月光涌进书房，他瞥见一双黑手深埋于白毛之中，肿胀的手指正渐渐掐紧冰原狼的咽喉。白灵又踢又扭，四肢在空中抽动，但无法脱身。
He felt something scrabble at his ankle. Black fingers clawed at his calf. The arm was crawling up his leg, ripping at wool and flesh. Shouting with revulsion, Jon pried the fingers off his leg with the point of his sword and flipped the thing away. It lay writhing, fingers opening and closing.
琼恩没有时间恐惧。他纵身向前，出声大喊，使尽浑身力气挥剑劈下。钢铁划过衣袖、皮肤和骨头，却不知怎地，声音很不对劲。他包围的气息奇怪而冰冷，差点将他噎住。他看见地上的断臂，黑色的手指正在一泓月光里蠕动。白灵从另外一只手中挣脱，伸着红彤彤的舌头爬到一边。
The corpse lurched forward. There was no blood. One-armed, face cut near in half, it seemed to feel nothing. Jon held the longsword before him. “Stay away!” he commanded, his voice gone shrill. “Corn,” screamed the raven, “corn, corn.” The severed arm was wriggling out of its torn sleeve, a pale snake with a black five-fingered head. Ghost pounced and got it between his teeth. Finger bones crunched. Jon hacked at the corpse’s neck, felt the steel bite deep and hard.
戴着兜帽的人抬起他那张惨白的圆脸，琼恩毫不迟疑，举剑就砍。利剑将他的鼻子劈成两半，砍出一道深可见骨、贯穿脸颊的裂口，正好在那双有如燃烧的湛蓝星星般的眼睛下方。琼恩认得这张脸。奥瑟，他踉跄后退，诸神保佑，他死了，他死了，我明明看见他死了。
Dead Othor slammed into him, knocking him off his feet.
他觉得有东西在扒自己脚踝。低头一看，只见漆黑的手指紧紧钳住他的小腿，那条断臂正往大腿上爬，一边撕扯羊毛和肌肉。琼恩感到一阵剧烈的恶心，他大叫一声，连忙用剑尖把脚上的手指撬开，然后把那东西丢掉。断臂在地上蠕动，手指不断开开阖阖。
Jon’s breath went out of him as the fallen table caught him between his shoulder blades. The sword, where was the sword? He’d lost the damned sword! When he opened his mouth to scream, the wight jammed its black corpse fingers into Jon’s mouth. Gagging, he tried to shove it off, but the dead man was too heavy. Its hand forced itself farther down his throat, icy cold, choking him. Its face was against his own, filling the world. Frost covered its eyes, sparkling blue. Jon raked cold flesh with his nails and kicked at the thing’s legs. He tried to bite, tried to punch, tried to breathe …
尸体蹒跚着向他逼近。它一滴血都没流，虽然少了一只手，脸也被几乎劈成两半，但它好像毫无知觉。琼恩把长剑举在面前。“不要过来！”他命令，声音刺耳。“玉米！”乌鸦尖叫，“玉米！玉米！”地上那条断臂正从裂开的衣袖里钻出来，宛如一条生了五个黑头的白蛇。白灵挥爪一攫，张口咬住断臂，立即传来指骨碎裂的声音。琼恩朝尸体的脖子砍下，感觉剑锋深深陷了进去。
And suddenly the corpse’s weight was gone, its fingers ripped from his throat. It was all Jon could do to roll over, retching and shaking. Ghost had it again. He watched as the direwolf buried his teeth in the wight’s gut and began to rip and tear. He watched, only half conscious, for a long moment before he finally remembered to look for his sword …
奥瑟的尸体冲过来，把他撞倒在地。
… and saw Lord Mormont, naked and groggy from sleep, standing in the doorway with an oil lamp in hand. Gnawed and fingerless, the arm thrashed on the floor, wriggling toward him.
琼恩的肩胛骨碰到翻倒的书桌，登时痛得喘不过气。剑在哪里？剑到哪儿去了？他竟然弄丢了那把天杀的剑！琼恩张口欲喊，尸鬼却将黑色的手指塞进他嘴里。他一边噎气，一边想把手推开，但尸体实在太重，鬼手硬是朝他喉咙深处钻，冷得像冰，令他窒息。那张尸脸紧贴他的脸，遮住了整个世界。那对眼睛覆满诡异的冰霜，闪着非人的蓝光。琼恩用指甲扒它冰冷的肌肉，踢它的腿，试着用嘴巴咬，用手捶，试着呼吸……
Jon tried to shout, but his voice was gone. Staggering to his feet, he kicked the arm away and snatched the lamp from the Old Bear’s fingers. The flame flickered and almost died. “Burn!” the raven cawed. “Burn, burn, burn!”
突然间尸体的重量消失，喉咙上的手指也被扯开。琼恩惟一能做的就只有翻身，拼命呕吐，不断发抖。
Spinning, Jon saw the drapes he’d ripped from the window. He flung the lamp into the puddled cloth with both hands. Metal crunched, glass shattered, oil spewed, and the hangings went up in a great whoosh of flame. The heat of it on his face was sweeter than any kiss Jon had ever known. “Ghost!” he shouted.
原来是白灵再度攻击。他看着冰原狼的利齿咬进尸鬼的内脏，又撕又扯。他就这么意识模糊地看了好一阵子，才想起来自己该把剑找到……
The direwolf wrenched free and came to him as the wight struggled to rise, dark snakes spilling from the great wound in its belly. Jon plunged his hand into the flames, grabbed a fistful of the burning drapes, and whipped them at the dead man. Let it burn , he prayed as the cloth smothered the corpse, gods, please, please, let it burn .
……回身看见浑身赤裸，刚从睡梦中惊醒，还很虚弱的莫尔蒙司令，提着一盏油灯站在过道。那条被咬得稀烂，又少了指头的断臂正在地板上猛烈摆动，蠕动着朝他爬去。
*BRAN
琼恩想要大喊，却没了声音。他踉跄地站起来，一脚把断臂踢开，伸手从熊老手中抢过油灯。只见灯焰晃动，险些就要熄灭。“烧啊！”乌鸦哇哇大叫，“烧啊！烧啊！烧啊！”
T he Karstarks came in on a cold windy morning, bringing three hundred horsemen and near two thousand foot from their castle at Karhold. The steel points of their pikes winked in the pale sunlight as the column approached. A man went before them, pounding out a slow, deep-throated marching rhythm on a drum that was bigger than he was, boom, boom, boom .
琼恩在原地忙乱转圈，瞥见先前从窗户扯下的帘幕，便两手握住灯，朝那一团布缦掷去。金属油灯落地，玻璃罩应声碎裂，灯油溅洒出来，窗帘立刻轰地一声，燃起熊熊烈焰。扑面而来的热气比琼恩尝过的任何一个吻都来得甜美。“白灵！”他叫道。
Bran watched them come from a guard turret atop the outer wall, peering through Maester Luwin’s bronze far-eye while perched on Hodor’s shoulders. Lord Rickard himself led them, his sons Harrion and Eddard and Torrhen riding beside him beneath night-black banners emblazoned with the white sunburst of their House. Old Nan said they had Stark blood in them, going back hundreds of years, but they did not look like Starks to Bran. They were big men, and fierce, faces covered with thick beards, hair worn loose past the shoulders. Their cloaks were made of skins, the pelts of bear and seal and wolf.
冰原狼从那正挣扎着爬起的尸鬼身上猛地一扭，抽身跳开。黑色的液体自死尸腹部的大裂口缓缓流出，好似一条条黑蛇。琼恩探手到火里抓起一把燃烧的布块，朝尸鬼扔去。烧啊，看着布块盖住尸体，他暗自祈祷，天上诸神，求求你们，求求你们让它烧啊。
They were the last, he knew. The other lords were already here, with their hosts. Bran yearned to ride out among them, to see the winter houses full to bursting, the jostling crowds in the market square every morning, the streets rutted and torn by wheel and hoof. But Robb had forbidden him to leave the castle. “We have no men to spare to guard you,” his brother had explained.
第五十四章 布兰
“I’ll take Summer,” Bran argued.
在一个北风飕飕的寒冷清晨，卡史塔克家族从卡霍城带着三百骑兵和近两千步兵抵达了临冬城。兵士的枪尖在苍白的目光中眨着眼睛。有个士卒走在队伍前方，敲着一个比他人还大的鼓，“咚，咚，咚”，击打出缓慢而沉厚的行军节奏。
“Don’t act the boy with me, Bran,” Robb said. “You know better than that. Only two days ago one of Lord Bolton’s men knifed one of Lord Cerwyn’s at the Smoking Log. Our lady mother would skin me for a pelt if I let you put yourself at risk.” He was using the voice of Robb the Lord when he said it; Bran knew that meant there was no appeal.
布兰待在外城墙上一座守卫塔里，坐在阿多肩头，正用鲁温学士的青铜望远镜观察渐渐走近的军队。瑞卡德伯爵亲自领军，他的儿子哈利昂、艾德和托伦骑马与之并肩而行，他们头顶飞扬着以漆黑夜色为底、白色日芒为徽的旗帜。老奶妈说他们体内流有史塔克族人的血液，可以追溯到数百年前，然而在布兰看来，这些人实在不像史塔克家后代，他们个个生得人高马大，神情剽悍，脸上长着粗粗的胡子，发长过肩，披风则是用熊、海豹和狼的皮做成。
It was because of what had happened in the wolfswood, he knew. The memory still gave him bad dreams. He had been as helpless as a baby, no more able to defend himself than Rickon would have been. Less, even … Rickon would have kicked them, at the least. It shamed him. He was only a few years younger than Robb; if his brother was almost a man grown, so was he. He should have been able to protect himself.
他知道，这是最后一批军队。其他领主已先后率兵抵达。布兰满心期盼能和他们一道骑马出城，去看看避冬市镇的屋宇人满为患、挤得水泄不通的模样；看看每天早上市集广场上的摩肩接踵；看看巷道印满车辙马蹄的景况。可罗柏不准他离开城堡。“我们没有多余的人手保护你。”哥哥向他解释。
A year ago, before , he would have visited the town even if it meant climbing over the walls by himself. In those days he could run down stairs, get on and off his pony by himself, and wield a wooden sword good enough to knock Prince Tommen in the dirt. Now he could only watch, peering out through Maester Luwin’s lens tube. The maester had taught him all the banners: the mailed fist of the Glovers, silver on scarlet; Lady Mormont’s black bear; the hideous flayed man that went before Roose Bolton of the Dreadfort; a bull moose for the Hornwoods; a battle-axe for the Cerwyns; three sentinel trees for the Tallharts; and the fearsome sigil of House Umber, a roaring giant in shattered chains.
“我会带夏天一起去啊。”布兰辩解。
And soon enough he learned the faces too, when the lords and their sons and knights retainer came to Winterfell to feast. Even the Great Hall was not large enough to seat all of them at once, so Robb hosted each of the principal bannermen in turn. Bran was always given the place of honor at his brother’s right hand. Some of the lords bannermen gave him queer hard stares as he sat there, as if they wondered by what right a green boy should be placed above them, and him a cripple too.
“布兰，别跟我孩子气，”罗柏说，“你自己很清楚。前两天波顿大人的手下才在烟柴酒馆杀了赛文伯爵一位部属。我若是让你身处险境，母亲大人不把我皮剥了才怪。”说这话的时候，他用的是“罗柏城主”的语气，布兰知道没有回旋余地。
“How many is it now?” Bran asked Maester Luwin as Lord Karstark and his sons rode through the gates in the outer wall.
其实他心里明白，这一定是因为之前狼林里那件事。如今回想起来，他依然会作噩梦。他像个婴儿一般无助，换做小瑞肯，大概也不会比他更无力。说不定他还比不上瑞肯……瑞肯至少能踢他们。为此他深感羞耻。他只比罗柏小几岁；假如哥哥已近成年，那他也相去不远。照说他应该能保卫自己才对。
“Twelve thousand men, or near enough as makes no matter.”
若是一年前，在事情发生以前，就算必须爬墙，他也会去探访市镇。那些日子里他可以奔跑楼梯，不假他人之力上下小马，还可以挥舞木剑，将托曼王子打倒在地。如今他只有拿鲁温师傅的透镜管观望的份。老学士把所有的旗帜家徽都教给了他：葛洛佛家族红底银色的钢甲拳套旗，莫尔蒙伯爵夫人的大黑熊旗，飞扬于恐怖堡领主卢斯·波顿队伍前方的剥皮人旗，霍伍德家族的驼鹿旗，赛文家族的战斧旗，陶哈家族的参天三哨兵树旗，以及安伯家族那吓人的碎链咆哮巨人旗。
“How many knights?”
短短时日里，北境诸侯们纷纷带着儿子、骑士和部属前来临冬城聚餐，他把他们的容貌也都记住了。即便城堡大厅，也无法同时容纳所有人，于是罗柏依次分开宴请主要封臣。布兰通常坐在哥哥右边的荣誉高位，可总有些领主眼神怪异地看着他，仿佛在质疑这么个乳臭未干的小孩儿有何资格坐他们上位，更何况他还是个残废。
“Few enough,” the maester said with a touch of impatience. “To be a knight, you must stand your vigil in a sept, and be anointed with the seven oils to consecrate your vows. In the north, only a few of the great houses worship the Seven. The rest honor the old gods, and name no knights … but those lords and their sons and sworn swords are no less fierce or loyal or honorable. A man’s worth is not marked by a ser before his name. As I have told you a hundred times before.”
“之前到了多少人？”卡史塔克伯爵和他的儿子们骑马穿过外墙城门时，布兰问鲁温学士。
“Still,” said Bran, “how many knights?”
“约莫一万两千人吧。”
Maester Luwin sighed. “Three hundred, perhaps four … among three thousand armored lances who are not knights.”
“有多少骑士呢？”
“Lord Karstark is the last,” Bran said thoughtfully. “Robb will feast him tonight.”
“非常少。”老师傅话中有些不耐烦，“要成为骑士，你必须先在圣堂里守夜，接受修士用七种圣油的涂抹，宣读誓言后方能得到祝福。在我们北方，多数人信奉旧神，少有贵族归化七神，所以并不册封骑士……然而这些领主和他们的儿子、部下不论武艺、忠诚还是荣誉感，可一点也不输他人。人的价值并非以爵士这个头衔来衡量，我已经告诉过你几百遍了。”
“No doubt he will.”
“可是，”布兰说，“到底有几个骑士嘛？”
“How long before … before they go?”
鲁温学士叹了口气。“三四百罢……但骑马配枪的普通战士总共约有三千。”
“He must march soon, or not at all,” Maester Luwin said. “The winter town is full to bursting, and this army of his will eat the countryside clean if it camps here much longer. Others are waiting to join him all along the kingsroad, barrow knights and crannogmen and the Lords Manderly and Flint. The fighting has begun in the riverlands, and your brother has many leagues to go.”
“卡史塔克大人是最后来的，”布兰若有所思地说，“罗柏今晚会宴请他。”
“I know.” Bran felt as miserable as he sounded. He handed the bronze tube back to the maester, and noticed how thin Luwin’s hair had grown on top. He could see the pink of scalp showing through. It felt queer to look down on him this way, when he’d spent his whole life looking up at him, but when you sat on Hodor’s back you looked down on everyone. “I don’t want to watch anymore. Hodor, take me back to the keep.”
“毫无疑问。”
“Hodor,” said Hodor.
“还有多久……他们才会出发？”
Maester Luwin tucked the tube up his sleeve. “Bran, your lord brother will not have time to see you now. He must greet Lord Karstark and his sons and make them welcome.”
“他得尽快动身，否则就走不了了。”鲁温师傅道，“避冬市镇里已经人满为患，而这支军队若是再待久一点，会把附近地区的存粮吃得一干二净。更何况国王大道沿途还有荒冢地的骑士，泽地人，曼德勒伯爵和佛林特伯爵等着加入呢。战火已在三河流域蔓延开来，你哥哥有很长一段路要走。”
“I won’t trouble Robb. I want to visit the godswood.” He put his hand on Hodor’s shoulder. “Hodor.”
“我知道。”布兰说。他把青铜镜管还给老学士，一边注意到鲁温脑顶的头发愈发稀少，以至于粉红的头皮若隐若现。这样从上俯视他感觉有些古怪，自己向来都是抬头仰望他的。话说回来，一旦坐上阿多的肩头，无论是看谁都成了俯视。“我不想看了。阿多，带我回城去。”
A series of chisel-cut handholds made a ladder in the granite of the tower’s inner wall. Hodor hummed tunelessly as he went down hand under hand, Bran bouncing against his back in the wicker seat that Maester Luwin had fashioned for him. Luwin had gotten the idea from the baskets the women used to carry firewood on their backs; after that it had been a simple matter of cutting legholes and attaching some new straps to spread Bran’s weight more evenly. It was not as good as riding Dancer, but there were places Dancer could not go, and this did not shame Bran the way it did when Hodor carried him in his arms like a baby. Hodor seemed to like it too, though with Hodor it was hard to tell. The only tricky part was doors. Sometimes Hodor forgot that he had Bran on his back, and that could be painful when he went through a door.
“阿多。”阿多说。
For near a fortnight there had been so many comings and goings that Robb ordered both portcullises kept up and the drawbridge down between them, even in the dead of night. A long column of armored lancers was crossing the moat between the walls when Bran emerged from the tower; Karstark men, following their lords into the castle. They wore black iron halfhelms and black woolen cloaks patterned with the white sunburst. Hodor trotted along beside them, smiling to himself, his boots thudding against the wood of the drawbridge. The riders gave them queer looks as they went by, and once Bran heard someone guffaw. He refused to let it trouble him. “Men will look at you,” Maester Luwin had warned him the first time they had strapped the wicker basket around Hodor’s chest. “They will look, and they will talk, and some will mock you.” Let them mock , Bran thought. No one mocked him in his bedchamber, but he would not live his life in bed.
鲁温师傅把镜管藏进袖子。“布兰，你哥哥现在没空见你，他得去迎接卡史塔克大人父子一行。”
As they passed beneath the gatehouse portcullis, Bran put two fingers into his mouth and whistled. Summer came loping across the yard. Suddenly the Karstark lancers were fighting for control, as their horses rolled their eyes and whickered in dismay. One stallion reared, screaming, his rider cursing and hanging on desperately. The scent of the direwolves sent horses into a frenzy of fear if they were not accustomed to it, but they’d quiet soon enough once Summer was gone. “The godswood,” Bran reminded Hodor.
“我不会打扰罗柏，我要去神木林。”他把手放在阿多的肩上。“阿多。”
Even Winterfell itself was crowded. The yard rang to the sound of sword and axe, the rumble of wagons, and the barking of dogs. The armory doors were open, and Bran glimpsed Mikken at his forge, his hammer ringing as sweat dripped off his bare chest. Bran had never seen as many strangers in all his years, not even when King Robert had come to visit Father.
塔楼内部的大理石墙上，有一连串凿出的把手，可作攀爬的楼梯。阿多一边哼着不成调的小曲，一边慢慢地爬下去。布兰坐在他背后的柳条篮子里，晃荡不停。篮子是鲁温学士特别制作的，他从妇女捡拾柴火所用的背篮中得到灵感，在此基础上割出两个洞让脚伸出，多加几条皮带以分散布兰的重量，完成了这个作品。这当然比不上骑乘小舞的感觉，但小舞有很多地方没法去，况且比起被阿多像个婴儿似的抱来抱去，这样起码不会让布兰觉得那么丢脸。阿多似乎也挺喜欢这个设计，虽然阿多到底在想些什么谁也说不准。惟一麻烦的是进出门，阿多有时会忘记背上还有个小布兰，这种进门方式可真让他疼痛难忘。
He tried not to flinch as Hodor ducked through a low door. They walked down a long dim hallway, Summer padding easily beside them. The wolf glanced up from time to time, eyes smoldering like liquid gold. Bran would have liked to touch him, but he was riding too high for his hand to reach.
近两周来，由于人马进出频繁，罗柏下令将内外城墙的闸门全都升起，两者之间的吊桥也放下，即使入夜也不例外。布兰从守卫塔出来时，一列长长的重装枪骑兵纵队正穿越护城河，他们是卡史塔克家的部队，正跟随主子进入城堡。这群人头戴黑色的半罩铁盔，身披有着白色日芒图案的黑羊毛披风。阿多快步走在旁边，自顾自地笑，靴子咚咚咚踩着木头吊桥。骑兵神情怪异地看着他们经过，布兰还听见有人粗声大笑，但他拒绝自己心绪被扰乱。“别人会看着你，”当他们头一次把柳条篮绑上阿多后背时，鲁温师傅就警告过他：“他们不但会看，会议论纷纷，有些人还会嘲笑你。”让他们嘲笑去罢，布兰心想。如果他待在卧房，就没有人能嘲笑，但他不愿一辈子都在床上度过。
The godswood was an island of peace in the sea of chaos that Winterfell had become. Hodor made his way through the dense stands of oak and ironwood and sentinels, to the still pool beside the heart tree. He stopped under the gnarled limbs of the weirwood, humming. Bran reached up over his head and pulled himself out of his seat, drawing the dead weight of his legs up through the holes in the wicker basket. He hung for a moment, dangling, the dark red leaves brushing against his face, until Hodor lifted him and lowered him to the smooth stone beside the water. “I want to be by myself for a while,” he said. “You go soak. Go to the pools.”
从闸门下经过时，布兰将两根手指伸进口中，吹起口哨。夏天立刻从广场彼端轻步跑来。刹时，马儿纷纷翻起白眼，惊恐地嘶声呜叫，卡史塔克家的枪骑兵不得不努力维持平衡。有一匹战马尖叫着抬起前蹄，骑在上面的武士高声咒骂，好容易才没摔下去。非经天长日久的习惯，马匹通常一闻到冰原狼的味道就会害怕得发狂，直等夏天走远它们才没事。“去神木林。”布兰提醒阿多。
“Hodor.” Hodor stomped through the trees and vanished. Across the godswood, beneath the windows of the Guest House, an underground hot spring fed three small ponds. Steam rose from the water day and night, and the wall that loomed above was thick with moss. Hodor hated cold water, and would fight like a treed wildcat when threatened with soap, but he would happily immerse himself in the hottest pool and sit for hours, giving a loud burp to echo the spring whenever a bubble rose from the murky green depths to break upon the surface.
他想不到临冬城也有人满为患的时候。场子里处处是刀斧碰撞、马车辘辘和猎狗吠叫。兵器库门大敞，布兰瞥见密肯站在锻炉边，不停敲打铁锤，赤裸的胸膛上汗水淋漓。布兰这辈子从没见过这么多陌生人，即便是劳勃国王来拜访父亲时也比不上。
Summer lapped at the water and settled down at Bran’s side. He rubbed the wolf under the jaw, and for a moment boy and beast both felt at peace. Bran had always liked the godswood, even before , but of late he found himself drawn to it more and more. Even the heart tree no longer scared him the way it used to. The deep red eyes carved into the pale trunk still watched him, yet somehow he took comfort from that now. The gods were looking over him, he told himself; the old gods, gods of the Starks and the First Men and the children of the forest, his father’s gods. He felt safe in their sight, and the deep silence of the trees helped him think. Bran had been thinking a lot since his fall; thinking, and dreaming, and talking with the gods.
阿多低身穿过一道矮门，布兰努力克制住自己不要畏缩。他们沿着一条漫长而阴暗的走廊前进，夏天脚步轻快地走在身边，不时抬眼看他，眼睛好似两团熊熊燃烧的液态黄金。布兰好想摸摸它，可他离地太远，手够不到。
“Please make it so Robb won’t go away,” he prayed softly. He moved his hand through the cold water, sending ripples across the pool. “Please make him stay. Or if he has to go, bring him home safe, with Mother and Father and the girls. And make it … make it so Rickon understands.”
这段日子以来，若说临冬城成了一片混乱汪洋，那神木林则是其中的宁静之岛。阿多穿过繁密的橡树、铁树和哨兵树，来到心树下静止无波的水潭边。他停在盘根错节的鱼梁木枝干底，口中哼着歌。布兰伸手抓住头顶的树枝，把自己拉出篮子，也将他那双软弱无力的脚自柳篮的两个洞里拉出来。他在那儿挂了一会儿，晃了几下，任暗红的树叶拂过脸庞，然后阿多接住他，把他放在池边平坦的大石上。“我想独处一下，”他说，“你去洗洗吧，去温泉。”
His baby brother had been wild as a winter storm since he learned Robb was riding off to war, weeping and angry by turns. He’d refused to eat, cried and screamed for most of a night, even punched Old Nan when she tried to sing him to sleep, and the next day he’d vanished. Robb had set half the castle searching for him, and when at last they’d found him down in the crypts, Rickon had slashed at them with a rusted iron sword he’d snatched from a dead king’s hand, and Shaggydog had come slavering out of the darkness like a green-eyed demon. The wolf was near as wild as Rickon; he’d bitten Gage on the arm and torn a chunk of flesh from Mikken’s thigh. It had taken Robb himself and Grey Wind to bring him to bay. Farlen had the black wolf chained up in the kennels now, and Rickon cried all the more for being without him.
“阿多！”阿多踩着“咚咚”大步，消失在树丛中。在神木林的另一边，客房窗户的正下方，有一座天然的地底温泉，注满了三个小池。池水日夜热气蒸腾，池边高墙爬满青苔。阿多痛恨冷水，若是叫他用肥皂，更会像只被踩到尾巴的山猫般拼死抵抗，但要换成温泉，即便最滚烫的池子他也不在乎，而且一泡动辄几个小时。每当浑浊的绿水面冒出气泡，他就大声打嗝，好像是在相互应和。
Maester Luwin counseled Robb to remain at Winterfell, and Bran pleaded with him too, for his own sake as much as Rickon’s, but his brother only shook his head stubbornly and said, “I don’t want to go. I have to.”
夏天舔舔池水，在布兰身边坐下。他挠挠狼的下巴，接下来的短短时间，小男孩和冰原狼都觉得宁静而安详。布兰向来很喜欢神木林，在意外发生前就很喜欢，而近来他发现自己越来越常来这里。即便心树，也不再像以前那么令他害怕。刻在惨白树干上的那对深邃红眼依旧凝视着他，然而他却能从中寻得慰藉。这是诸神在看顾着他，他这么告诉自己；这是古老的诸神，属于史塔克家族、先民和森林之子的神，是父亲所信仰的神。在他们的注视下，他觉得很有安全感，而树林里深沉的寂静更有助于他理清思绪。自坠楼以来，布兰经常陷入沉思：思索，作梦，和诸神对话。
It was only half a lie. Someone had to go, to hold the Neck and help the Tullys against the Lannisters, Bran could understand that, but it did not have to be Robb. His brother might have given the command to Hal Mollen or Theon Greyjoy, or to one of his lords bannermen. Maester Luwin urged him to do just that, but Robb would not hear of it. “My lord father would never have sent men off to die while he huddled like a craven behind the walls of Winterfell,” he said, all Robb the Lord.
“请不要让罗柏离开，”他轻声祷告，伸手拨弄冰冷的池水，池面激起涟漪。“请让他留下来吧。如果他真的非走不可，就让他平安归来，和父亲母亲以及姐姐们一起回家。还有，请让……请让瑞肯懂事。”
Robb seemed half a stranger to Bran now, transformed, a lord in truth, though he had not yet seen his sixteenth name day. Even their father’s bannermen seemed to sense it. Many tried to test him, each in his own way. Roose Bolton and Robett Glover both demanded the honor of battle command, the first brusquely, the second with a smile and a jest. Stout, grey-haired Maege Mormont, dressed in mail like a man, told Robb bluntly that he was young enough to be her grandson, and had no business giving her commands … but as it happened, she had a granddaughter she would be willing to have him marry. Soft-spoken Lord Cerwyn had actually brought his daughter with him, a plump, homely maid of thirty years who sat at her father’s left hand and never lifted her eyes from her plate. Jovial Lord Hornwood had no daughters, but he did bring gifts, a horse one day, a haunch of venison the next, a silver-chased hunting horn the day after, and he asked nothing in return … nothing but a certain holdfast taken from his grandfather, and hunting rights north of a certain ridge, and leave to dam the White Knife, if it please the lord.
得知罗柏即将率兵出征的那一天，他的小弟弟便像冬天的暴风雪一样发了狂，一会儿嚎啕大哭，一会儿又大发脾气。他不肯吃饭，整晚哭闹尖叫，连给他唱摇篮曲的老奶妈，他也拳头相向，第二天更是跑得没了踪影。罗柏派出城里大半的人手去找他，最后才发现他躲在地下墓窖，还从某个死去国王的雕像手中抓了把生锈铁剑，朝人们又挥又砍，毛毛狗也流着口水从暗处冲出挑衅，活像个绿眼睛的恶魔。那只狼差不多跟瑞肯一样狂乱；它不仅咬伤盖奇的手，还撕掉密肯一块大腿肉。最后是罗柏带着灰风亲自出马，才把他们制服。现在法兰把黑狼锁在狗舍里，瑞肯没了狼，哭得更厉害了。
Robb answered each of them with cool courtesy, much as Father might have, and somehow he bent them to his will.
鲁温师傅建议罗柏留在临冬城，布兰也向他哀求过，不光为了自己，更是为了瑞肯。但哥哥固执地摇摇头：“我并不想走，但我非走不可。”
And when Lord Umber, who was called the Greatjon by his men and stood as tall as Hodor and twice as wide, threatened to take his forces home if he was placed behind the Hornwoods or the Cerwyns in the order of march, Robb told him he was welcome to do so. “And when we are done with the Lannisters,” he promised, scratching Grey Wind behind the ear, “we will march back north, root you out of your keep, and hang you for an oathbreaker.” Cursing, the Greatjon flung a flagon of ale into the fire and bellowed that Robb was so green he must piss grass. When Hallis Mollen moved to restrain him, he knocked him to the floor, kicked over a table, and unsheathed the biggest, ugliest greatsword that Bran had ever seen. All along the benches, his sons and brothers and sworn swords leapt to their feet, grabbing for their steel.
这并非全然谎话。总得有人去防守颈泽，协助徒利家族对付兰尼斯特，这点布兰可以理解，但不一定非要罗柏出马啊。哥哥大可把指挥权交给哈尔·莫兰或席恩·葛雷乔伊，甚或他手下的封臣。鲁温学士也劝他这么做，可罗柏不肯听。“父亲大人绝不会派别人去送死，自己却像个胆小鬼似的躲在临冬城的墙垒之后。”他这么说，完全是罗柏城主的口气。
Yet Robb only said a quiet word, and in a snarl and the blink of an eye Lord Umber was on his back, his sword spinning on the floor three feet away and his hand dripping blood where Grey Wind had bitten off two fingers. “My lord father taught me that it was death to bare steel against your liege lord,” Robb said, “but doubtless you only meant to cut my meat.” Bran’s bowels went to water as the Greatjon struggled to rise, sucking at the red stumps of fingers … but then, astonishingly, the huge man laughed . “Your meat,” he roared, “is bloody tough.”
对布兰来说，如今的罗柏活像半个陌生人，仿佛真正变成了一方之主，虽然他还不到十六岁。父亲的封臣们注意到他的状况，许多人试图用自己的方式来考验他：卢斯·波顿口气莽撞地要求让他领军；罗贝特·葛洛佛虽是说说笑笑，但有着相同的目的；体格粗壮，头发灰白，像男人全身着盔甲的梅姬·莫尔蒙毫不客气地说罗柏的年纪足以当她孙子，没资格对她颐指气使……不过呢，她倒刚巧有个孙女儿可以嫁给他；讲话轻声细语的赛文伯爵直接把女儿给带来了，她的相貌平庸，胖嘟嘟的，年约三十，坐在她父亲左手，自始至终没将视线从餐盘里抬起过；友善的霍伍德伯爵没有女儿，但他带了很多礼物，今天送匹马，明天送一大块鹿肉，隔天又送一个漂亮的银边猎号，而且完全不要回报……除了希求从他祖父手中夺走的一小块地，某个山脊北部的狩猎权，以及在白刃河修筑水坝的权利等等。当然，如果城主大人高兴的话。
And somehow after that the Greatjon became Robb’s right hand, his staunchest champion, loudly telling all and sundry that the boy lord was a Stark after all, and they’d damn well better bend their knees if they didn’t fancy having them chewed off.
罗柏冷静而有礼貌地一一应答，渐渐收服了他们的心，今天若换做父亲，大概也不过如此吧。
Yet that very night, his brother came to Bran’s bedchamber pale and shaken, after the fires had burned low in the Great Hall. “I thought he was going to kill me,” Robb confessed. “Did you see the way he threw down Hal, like he was no bigger than Rickon? Gods, I was so scared. And the Greatjon’s not the worst of them, only the loudest. Lord Roose never says a word, he only looks at me, and all I can think of is that room they have in the Dreadfort, where the Boltons hang the skins of their enemies.”
而当那个人称“大琼恩”，身形和阿多一样高，却足足壮他两倍的安柏伯爵出言不逊，声称假如要他走在霍伍德或赛文家部队后面，他就立刻班师回家时，罗柏说欢迎他这么做。“等收拾兰尼斯特之后，”他向对方保证，一边搔着灰风的耳背。“我们会立刻回师北方，把你从你家城堡里抓出来，当成背誓者吊死。”大琼恩听了破口大骂，将一罐麦酒丢进火里，他吹胡子瞪眼地说罗柏不过是个青涩的毛头小鬼，八成连尿都是草绿色的。哈里斯·莫兰上前劝阻，却被他推倒在地，接着他踢翻桌子，拔出一把布兰所知最大最丑的巨剑。他坐在两边长凳上的儿子、兄弟和部下们也纷纷一跃起身，伸手握住武器。
“That’s just one of Old Nan’s stories,” Bran said. A note of doubt crept into his voice. “Isn’t it?”
然而罗柏不过轻轻说了一个字，只听灰风一声怒吼，立时便咬掉安柏伯爵两根手指，把他摔得四脚朝天，剑飞到三尺之外，手上鲜血淋漓。“家父曾经教导我，在宣誓效忠的领主面前拔剑是惟一死罪。”罗柏说，“但我相信您只是想帮我切肉罢了。”布兰看着大琼恩挣扎起身，吸吮那血红一片的断指，五脏六腑绞成一团……出人意料，接着这大个子竟然笑了。“你的肉，”他大吼，“还真他妈的硬！”
“I don’t know.” He gave a weary shake of his head. “Lord Cerwyn means to take his daughter south with us. To cook for him, he says. Theon is certain I’ll find the girl in my bedroll one night. I wish … I wish Father was here …”
不知为什么，从那之后，大琼恩便成了罗柏的左右手和最坚定的拥护者，到处扯开嗓门对人说，别看这位新城主年纪小，他可是个货真价实的史塔克传人，你们都他妈的赶紧乖乖下跪，不然瞧他不把你膝盖剁掉。
That was the one thing they could agree on, Bran and Rickon and Robb the Lord; they all wished Father was here. But Lord Eddard was a thousand leagues away, a captive in some dungeon, a hunted fugitive running for his life, or even dead. No one seemed to know for certain; every traveler told a different tale, each more terrifying than the last. The heads of Father’s guardsmen were rotting on the walls of the Red Keep, impaled on spikes. King Robert was dead at Father’s hands. The Baratheons had laid siege to King’s Landing. Lord Eddard had fled south with the king’s wicked brother Renly. Arya and Sansa had been murdered by the Hound. Mother had killed Tyrion the Imp and hung his body from the walls of Riverrun. Lord Tywin Lannister was marching on the Eyrie, burning and slaughtering as he went. One wine-sodden taleteller even claimed that Rhaegar Targaryen had returned from the dead and was marshaling a vast host of ancient heroes on Dragonstone to reclaim his father’s throne.
然而当天夜里，大厅的炉火渐熄之后，哥哥却一脸苍白地来到布兰卧房，浑身发抖。“我以为他会把我给杀了，”罗柏坦承，“你看他推倒哈尔的样子吗？好像当他是瑞肯！诸神在上，真是吓死我了。大琼恩还不是最麻烦的，他只是嗓门最大而已。卢斯大人他一句话也不说，就这么看着我，结果我满脑子想的都是他恐怖堡里那个房间，听说波顿家族的人把敌人的皮剥下来挂在那儿。”
When the raven came, bearing a letter marked with Father’s own seal and written in Sansa’s hand, the cruel truth seemed no less incredible. Bran would never forget the look on Robb’s face as he stared at their sister’s words. “She says Father conspired at treason with the king’s brothers,” he read. “King Robert is dead, and Mother and I are summoned to the Red Keep to swear fealty to Joffrey. She says we must be loyal, and when she marries Joffrey she will plead with him to spare our lord father’s life.” His fingers closed into a fist, crushing Sansa’s letter between them. “And she says nothing of Arya, nothing , not so much as a word. Damn her! What’s wrong with the girl?”
“那只是老奶妈的故事，”布兰说，一丝怀疑却爬进了他的嗓音。“对吧？”
Bran felt all cold inside. “She lost her wolf,” he said, weakly, remembering the day when four of his father’s guardsmen had returned from the south with Lady’s bones. Summer and Grey Wind and Shaggydog had begun to howl before they crossed the drawbridge, in voices drawn and desolate. Beneath the shadow of the First Keep was an ancient lichyard, its headstones spotted with pale lichen, where the old Kings of Winter had laid their faithful servants. It was there they buried Lady, while her brothers stalked between the graves like restless shadows. She had gone south, and only her bones had returned.
“我不知道。”哥哥虚弱地摇摇头。“赛文大人打算带他女儿一道南下，说要为他煮饭。可席恩却肯定，某天夜里我一定会发现这女孩躺进我的睡铺。我好希望……我好希望父亲也在……”
Their grandfather, old Lord Rickard, had gone as well, with his son Brandon who was Father’s brother, and two hundred of his best men. None had ever returned. And Father had gone south, with Arya and Sansa, and Jory and Hullen and Fat Tom and the rest, and later Mother and Ser Rodrik had gone, and they hadn’t come back either. And now Robb meant to go. Not to King’s Landing and not to swear fealty, but to Riverrun, with a sword in his hand. And if their lord father were truly a prisoner, that could mean his death for a certainty. It frightened Bran more than he could say.
布兰、瑞肯和罗柏城主总算在这件事上达成一致：他们都希望父亲还在身边。但艾德公爵毕竟身在千里之外，身陷囹圄，或许成了亡命奔逃的通缉犯，甚至已经死去。真相究竟如何，没有人能确定，每个旅人所说的版本都不一样，而且一个比一个可怕：父亲手下卫士的头被插在枪尖，挂在红堡城墙上腐烂啦；劳勃国王死在父亲手中啦；拜拉席恩家的军队围攻君临啦；艾德公爵和国王的坏弟弟蓝礼一同逃往南方啦；艾莉亚和珊莎都被猎狗所杀啦；母亲杀了小恶魔提利昂，把他的尸体挂在奔流城城墙上啦；或者是泰温·兰尼斯特公爵率兵往鹰巢城进发，沿途烧杀掳掠之类。有个浑身酒味的说书人，甚至宣称雷加·坦格利安已经死而复生，正在龙石岛上号召千古英雄，准备夺回他父王的宝座呢。
“If Robb has to go, watch over him,” Bran entreated the old gods, as they watched him with the heart tree’s red eyes, “and watch over his men, Hal and Quent and the rest, and Lord Umber and Lady Mormont and the other lords. And Theon too, I suppose. Watch them and keep them safe, if it please you, gods. Help them defeat the Lannisters and save Father and bring them home.”
所以，后来当渡鸦带着由珊莎手书，盖了父亲印章的信件抵达时，残酷的事实似乎也不再那么令人惊讶。布兰永远忘不了罗柏读着姐姐来信时脸上的表情。“她说父亲和国王的两个弟弟密谋篡位，”他念道，“劳勃国王已死，母亲和我应火速前往红堡向乔佛里宣誓效忠。她说我们必须保证忠贞不贰，等她嫁给乔佛里，她会请求他饶父亲一命。”他用力握拳，把珊莎的信捏得稀烂。“她只字未提艾莉亚的情形，没有，一个字都没有！真是该死！这女孩到底怎么回事？”
A faint wind sighed through the godswood and the red leaves stirred and whispered. Summer bared his teeth. “You hear them, boy?” a voice asked.
布兰的心凉了半截。“她没了小狼。”他虚弱地说，忆起那天父亲手下四名卫士从南方归来，带回淑女的遗骸，还没走过吊桥，夏天、灰风和毛毛狗便开始了凄楚的长嚎。在首堡的阴影下，有座古老的墓园，其中的墓碑上爬满了苍白的地衣，从前的冬境之王便是在此安葬他们忠诚的部属。他们在这里葬了淑女，她的兄弟不安地在坟墓间来回走动。她前往南方，归来却只剩骨骸。
Bran lifted his head. Osha stood across the pool, beneath an ancient oak, her face shadowed by leaves. Even in irons, the Wildling moved quiet as a cat. Summer circled the pool, sniffed at her. The tall woman flinched.
他们的祖父，老瑞卡德公爵，也曾前往南方，去的还有父亲的哥哥布兰登，以及公爵手下两百名精锐武士，结果无人归来。父亲也去了南方，他带着艾莉亚和珊莎，乔里、胡伦、胖汤姆和其他人，后来母亲和罗德利克爵士亦跟着去了，他们至今也都没回来。而今罗柏也要去，况且目的并非前往君临宣誓效忠，而是手握利剑，杀到奔流城去。假如父亲大人真的身在狱中，此举等于是宣判了他的死刑。布兰害怕得不知如何是好。
“Summer, to me,” Bran called. The direwolf took one final sniff, spun, and bounded back. Bran wrapped his arms around him. “What are you doing here?” He had not seen Osha since they’d taken her captive in the wolfswood, though he knew she’d been set to working in the kitchens.
“如果罗柏非去不可，请您们务必看顾他，”在远古诸神透过心树红眼睛的注视之下，布兰向他们祈求。“也请您们看顾他的部下，看顾哈尔、昆特他们，以及安柏大人、莫尔蒙夫人和其他诸侯。还有，还有席恩罢。请帮助他们打败兰尼斯特家的军队，救出父亲，把他带回家。”
“They are my gods too,” Osha said. “Beyond the Wall, they are the only gods.” Her hair was growing out, brown and shaggy. It made her look more womanly, that and the simple dress of brown roughspun they’d given her when they took her mail and leather. “Gage lets me have my prayers from time to time, when I feel the need, and I let him do as he likes under my skirt, when he feels the need. It’s nothing to me. I like the smell of flour on his hands, and he’s gentler than Stiv.” She gave an awkward bow. “I’ll leave you. There’s pots that want scouring.”
一阵微风拂过神木林，有如深沉的叹息，红叶沙沙作响，彼此窃窃私语。夏天露出利齿。“小子，你听见他们的回答了吗？”一个声音问。
“No, stay,” Bran commanded her. “Tell me what you meant, about hearing the gods.”
布兰抬起头，发现欧莎站在水池对面，正好在一棵古老的橡树底下，树叶遮住了她的脸。即使戴着手铐脚镣，这名野人依旧敏捷如猫。夏天绕过池子，朝她嗅了嗅。高个女人不禁一缩。
Osha studied him. “You asked them and they’re answering. Open your ears, listen, you’ll hear.”
“夏天，过来。”布兰唤道。冰原狼闻了最后一下，转身跑回。布兰伸手抱住它。“你在这里做什么？”自她在狼林被俘之后，布兰便没再见过她，但他知道她被派去厨房工作。
Bran listened. “It’s only the wind,” he said after a moment, uncertain. “The leaves are rustling.”
“他们也是我的神，”欧莎道，“在长城之外，他们是惟一的真神。”她逐渐长长的棕色短发，和着那件朴素的棕色粗布衣，使她看起来比较像个女人。至于她的盔甲和皮革背心，早在被捕时就被拿走了。“盖奇时常会放我来这儿祷告，当我有需要的时候；而我也会让他掀起我的裙子办事，当他有需要的时候。对我来说这没什么，我还挺喜欢他手上的面粉味，更何况他比史帝夫温柔多了。”她有些不自在地鞠了个躬。“我不打扰了，还有些罐子要涮呢。”
“Who do you think sends the wind, if not the gods?” She seated herself across the pool from him, clinking faintly as she moved. Mikken had fixed iron manacles to her ankles, with a heavy chain between them; she could walk, so long as she kept her strides small, but there was no way for her to run, or climb, or mount a horse. “They see you, boy. They hear you talking. That rustling, that’s them talking back.”
“不，留下来。”布兰命令她。“你刚才说能听见神说话，告诉我那是什么意思。”
“What are they saying?”
欧莎端详着他。“你向他们祈求，而他们正在回答。竖起耳朵，仔细倾听，你就会听到。”
“They’re sad. Your lord brother will get no help from them, not where he’s going. The old gods have no power in the south. The weirwoods there were all cut down, thousands of years ago. How can they watch your brother when they have no eyes?”
布兰竖耳倾听。“不过是风声，”听了一会儿后，他不太确定地说，“还有叶子响动。”
Bran had not thought of that. It frightened him. If even the gods could not help his brother, what hope was there? Maybe Osha wasn’t hearing them right. He cocked his head and tried to listen again. He thought he could hear the sadness now, but nothing more than that.
“你以为这风是谁送来的？当然是天上诸神啊。”她在池对面坐下来，身上的锁链一阵轻响。密肯打造了一副脚镣，用沉重的铁链相连，扣住她两边脚踝；她能小步走路，但绝对跑不了，也没办法爬墙或骑马。“小子，他们看到了你，也听到了你说的话。树叶的声音就是他们的回答。”
The rustling grew louder. Bran heard muffled footfalls and a low humming, and Hodor came blundering out of the trees, naked and smiling. “Hodor!”
“他们在说什么？”
“He must have heard our voices,” Bran said. “Hodor, you forgot your clothes.”
“他们很哀伤。你的城主哥哥要去的地方，他们无法帮他。旧神在南方没有力量，那儿的鱼梁木早在几千年前就被砍伐一空。没有眼睛，他们该如何看顾你哥哥呢？”
“Hodor,” Hodor agreed. He was dripping wet from the neck down, steaming in the chill air. His body was covered with brown hair, thick as a pelt. Between his legs, his manhood swung long and heavy.
布兰没想到这层。于是他害怕起来，若是连天上诸神都无法帮助哥哥，那还有何希望？或许是欧莎听错了。他歪着头，想要亲自再听听看，这回他听出了风中的哀伤，但仅此而已。
Osha eyed him with a sour smile. “Now there’s a big man,” she said. “He has giant’s blood in him, or I’m the queen.”
沙沙声渐大，混杂着模糊的脚步和低沉的哼歌，浑身赤裸的阿多大步从林子里跑出来，面带微笑。“阿多！”
“Maester Luwin says there are no more giants. He says they’re all dead, like the children of the forest. All that’s left of them are old bones in the earth that men turn up with plows from time to time.”
“他一定是听到了我们的声音，”布兰说，“阿多，你忘记穿衣服啰。”
“Let Maester Luwin ride beyond the Wall,” Osha said. “He’ll find giants then, or they’ll find him. My brother killed one. Ten foot tall she was, and stunted at that. They’ve been known to grow big as twelve and thirteen feet. Fierce things they are too, all hair and teeth, and the wives have beards like their husbands, so there’s no telling them apart. The women take human men for lovers, and it’s from them the half bloods come. It goes harder on the women they catch. The men are so big they’ll rip a maid apart before they get her with child.” She grinned at him. “But you don’t know what I mean, do you, boy?”
“阿多！”阿多同意。他从头到脚滴着水，在冷空气里冒烟。他浑身长满褐色体毛，厚厚的活像一层皮，又长又大的命根子垂挂在两脚之间。
“Yes I do,” Bran insisted. He understood about mating; he had seen dogs in the yard, and watched a stallion mount a mare. But talking about it made him uncomfortable. He looked at Hodor. “Go back and bring your clothes, Hodor,” he said. “Go dress.”
欧莎似笑非笑地看了他一眼。“这可真是个大块头啊，”她道，“我敢说，他体内有巨人的血统。”
“Hodor.” He walked back the way he had come, ducking under a low-hanging tree limb.
“鲁温师傅说世界上已经没有巨人了，他们都死了，和森林之子一样。剩下的只是他们的骨头，埋在地底，农夫犁田的时候常会翻到。”
He was awfully big, Bran thought as he watched him go. “Are there truly giants beyond the Wall?” he asked Osha, uncertainly.
“你叫鲁温师傅到长城外面去瞧瞧，”欧莎说：“他会看到巨人，不然巨人也会找上他。我老哥就杀死过一个，她身高十尺，这还算是矮的。据说他们可以长到十二尺或十三尺，性情凶猛，浑身体毛，还生着尖牙齿。女巨人和她们的丈夫一样长有胡子，让人难以辨认。女巨人也会找人类男子当情人，巨人的血统就是这样流传出来的。相反，女方则做不到，男巨人体型太大，被他们强暴的女孩子还没怀孕就先被扯裂了。”她对他嘿嘿一笑。“小子，我看你不明白我在说什么，对吧？”
“Giants and worse than giants, Lordling. I tried to tell your brother when he asked his questions, him and your maester and that smiley boy Greyjoy. The cold winds are rising, and men go out from their fires and never come back … or if they do, they’re not men no more, but only wights, with blue eyes and cold black hands. Why do you think I run south with Stiv and Hali and the rest of them fools? Mance thinks he’ll fight, the brave sweet stubborn man, like the white walkers were no more than rangers, but what does he know? He can call himself King-beyond-the-Wall all he likes, but he’s still just another old black crow who flew down from the Shadow Tower. He’s never tasted winter. I was born up there, child, like my mother and her mother before her and her mother before her, born of the Free Folk. We remember.” Osha stood, her chains rattling together. “I tried to tell your lordling brother. Only yesterday, when I saw him in the yard. ‘M’lord Stark,’ I called to him, respectful as you please, but he looked through me, and that sweaty oaf Greatjon Umber shoves me out of the path. So be it. I’ll wear my irons and hold my tongue. A man who won’t listen can’t hear.”
“我知道啦。”布兰坚持。他知道交配是怎么回事：他看过场子上的狗交配，也见过公马骑母马，但谈论这方面的事令他不太舒服。他望向阿多。“阿多，去把你的衣服拿来，”他说：“去把衣服穿上。”
“Tell me . Robb will listen to me, I know he will.”
“阿多。”他循原路走回，弯身穿过一根低垂的树枝。
“Will he now? We’ll see. You tell him this, m’lord. You tell him he’s bound on marching the wrong way. It’s north he should be taking his swords. North , not south. You hear me?”
他块头真的好大呀，布兰目送他离去，心里想着。“长城外真的有巨人吗？”他有些迟疑地问欧莎。
Bran nodded. “I’ll tell him.”
“小少爷，不只巨人，还有比巨人更可怕的东西。你哥哥盘问我的时候，我就是这么跟他和你家老学士，以及那成天笑嘻嘻的葛雷乔伊说的。冷风已然吹起，人们若是离开炉火，就一去不返……就算回得来，也已经不是人了。他们变成尸鬼，生了蓝眼睛和冷冰冰的黑手。你以为我和史帝夫、哈莉以及其他那几个蠢蛋为啥逃到南方？曼斯这固执幼稚的老小子，自以为勇敢，想要对付他们，好像白鬼跟游骑兵没两样，可他懂什么？他再怎么自称‘塞外之王’，说穿了还不是只影子塔上飞下来的臭乌鸦？他根本没尝过冬天的滋味。我告诉你，小子，我是在那儿出生的，跟我老妈，我老妈的老妈以及她祖上好几代一样，我们是天生的‘自由民’，冬天什么样子，我们可是记得一清二楚。”欧莎站起身，脚上的铁链喀啦作响。“我试着告诉你那城主老哥，就昨天，我还在场子上见着他。‘史塔克大人，’我叫他，客气得可以，可他正眼都不瞧我一眼，而那满身汗臭的笨牛大琼恩·安柏手一挥就把我推开。既然这样，那就算啦，我就乖乖闭上嘴巴，戴着铁链。不愿倾听的人自然什么也听不到。”
But that night, when they feasted in the Great Hall, Robb was not with them. He took his meal in the solar instead, with Lord Rickard and the Greatjon and the other lords bannermen, to make the final plans for the long march to come. It was left to Bran to fill his place at the head of the table, and act the host to Lord Karstark’s sons and honored friends. They were already at their places when Hodor carried Bran into the hall on his back, and knelt beside the high seat. Two of the serving men helped lift him from his basket. Bran could feel the eyes of every stranger in the hall. It had grown quiet. “My lords,” Hallis Mollen announced, “Brandon Stark, of Winterfell.”
“跟我说吧。我说的话罗柏会听，我知道他会听。”
“I welcome you to our fires,” Bran said stiffly, “and offer you meat and mead in honor of our friendship.”
“真的吗？那好。大人，您就这么跟他说：你走错了方向，应该带兵去北方。北方，不是南方，你听懂了没？”
Harrion Karstark, the oldest of Lord Rickard’s sons, bowed, and his brothers after him, yet as they settled back in their places he heard the younger two talking in low voices, over the clatter of wine cups. “… sooner die than live like that,” muttered one, his father’s namesake Eddard, and his brother Torrhen said likely the boy was broken inside as well as out, too craven to take his own life.
布兰点点头。“我会告诉他的。”
Broken , Bran thought bitterly as he clutched his knife. Is that what he was now? Bran the Broken? “I don’t want to be broken,” he whispered fiercely to Maester Luwin, who’d been seated to his right. “I want to be a knight.”
然而当晚在大厅用餐时，罗柏却不在场。他在书房里用餐，和瑞卡德伯爵、大琼恩以及其他诸侯共商大计，为即将来临的长征做最后策划。于是布兰只好扮演主人的角色，代替他坐在餐桌首席，欢迎卡史塔克伯爵的儿子和部下。阿多背着布兰走进大厅时，他们都已就座。阿多在高位旁蹲下，两名仆人把他从篮子里抱出。布兰觉得整个大厅顿时安静下来，每一双陌生的眼睛都盯着他看。“诸位大人，”哈里斯·莫兰朗声宣布，“临冬城的布兰登·史塔克到。”
“There are some who call my order the knights of the mind,” Luwin replied. “You are a surpassing clever boy when you work at it, Bran. Have you ever thought that you might wear a maester’s chain? There is no limit to what you might learn.”
“欢迎各位来到我们的火炉边，”布兰生硬地说，“让我们共享佳肴美酒，象征友谊长存。”
“I want to learn magic,” Bran told him. “The crow promised that I would fly.”
卡史塔克伯爵的大儿子哈利昂·卡史塔克鞠了个躬，他的弟弟们也依次行礼，可当他们坐下后，在一片酒杯碰撞声中，他却听见那两个小儿子低声交谈。“……宁愿死也不要这样苟延残喘。”名叫艾德的那个说，而另一个叫托伦的则说那男孩大概不只身体残废，心里也是残废，胆子太小，不敢自杀。
Maester Luwin sighed. “I can teach you history, healing, herblore. I can teach you the speech of ravens, and how to build a castle, and the way a sailor steers his ship by the stars. I can teach you to measure the days and mark the seasons, and at the Citadel in Oldtown they can teach you a thousand things more. But, Bran, no man can teach you magic.”
残废，布兰握着餐刀，心中苦涩地想，这就是现在的他？残废的布兰？“我也不想残废啊，”他语气激烈地对坐在右手边的鲁温学士低语，“我想当骑士。”
“The children could,” Bran said. “The children of the forest.” That reminded him of the promise he had made to Osha in the godswood, so he told Luwin what she had said.
“有人称我的组织为‘心灵的骑士’，”鲁温回答，“布兰，你一旦用心起来，是个聪明绝顶的孩子。你可曾考虑戴上学士的项链？学海无涯，你想学什么都可以。”
The maester listened politely. “The Wildling woman could give Old Nan lessons in telling tales, I think,” he said when Bran was done. “I will talk with her again if you like, but it would be best if you did not trouble your brother with this folly. He has more than enough to concern him without fretting over giants and dead men in the woods. It’s the Lannisters who hold your lord father, Bran, not the children of the forest.” He put a gentle hand on Bran’s arm. “Think on what I said, child.”
“我想学魔法。”布兰告诉他，“我梦里那只乌鸦向我保证我可以飞。”
And two days later, as a red dawn broke across a windswept sky, Bran found himself in the yard beneath the gatehouse, strapped atop Dancer as he said his farewells to his brother.
鲁温学士叹了口气。“我可以教你历史、医术和药草知识；可以教你如何与乌鸦沟通、如何修筑城堡；可以教你水手是如何借助星辰制定航向；可以教你如何计算历法、观测季节。在旧镇的学城里，他们还可以教你一千种其他功夫。但是，布兰，没有人能教你魔法。”
“You are the lord in Winterfell now,” Robb told him. He was mounted on a shaggy grey stallion, his shield hung from the horse’s side; wood banded with iron, white and grey, and on it the snarling face of a direwolf. His brother wore grey chainmail over bleached leathers, sword and dagger at his waist, a fur-trimmed cloak across his shoulders. “You must take my place, as I took Father’s, until we come home.”
“森林之子可以，”布兰说，“森林之子一定可以。”这让他想起早先时在神木林里答应欧莎的事，于是他把她所说的话一五一十告诉了鲁温师傅。
“I know,” Bran replied miserably. He had never felt so little or alone or scared. He did not know how to be a lord.
老学士很有礼貌地听完。“我认为这个女野人可以教老奶妈说故事。”布兰讲完之后，他静静地说，“你坚持的话，我可以再去跟她谈谈，不过，我认为你最好别拿这些荒唐话去烦你哥哥。他要操心的事情已经够多，没时间理会什么巨人和林子里的死者。布兰，囚禁你父亲的是兰尼斯特，而非森林之子啊。”他轻拍布兰手臂。“孩子，仔细想想我说的话吧。”
“Listen to Maester Luwin’s counsel, and take care of Rickon. Tell him that I’ll be back as soon as the fighting is done.”
两天后，当晨光染红强风吹拂的天边薄云之际，布兰被捆在小舞背上，在城门楼下的广场与哥哥道别。
Rickon had refused to come down. He was up in his chamber, red-eyed and defiant. “No!” he’d screamed when Bran had asked if he didn’t want to say farewell to Robb. “NO farewell!”
“如今你就是临冬城主，”罗柏告诉他。哥哥骑着一匹长毛的灰骏马，盾牌悬挂在旁边：木造盾牌，外镶铁片，灰白相间，上面刻画了咆哮的冰原狼头。他身穿漂白的皮革背心，外罩灰色锁子甲，腰际挂着长剑和匕首，肩披绒毛滚边的披风。“你必须暂代我职，如同我暂代父亲的位置一样，直到我们回家。”
“I told him,” Bran said. “He says no one ever comes back.”
“我知道。”布兰可怜兮兮地回答。他从未感觉如此孤单寂寞，又如此害怕。他根本不知道城主该怎么当。
“He can’t be a baby forever. He’s a Stark, and near four.” Robb sighed. “Well, Mother will be home soon. And I’ll bring back Father, I promise.”
“听从鲁温师傅的意见，并好好照顾瑞肯。告诉他，等战事结束，我就立刻回家。”
He wheeled his courser around and trotted away. Grey Wind followed, loping beside the warhorse, lean and swift. Hallis Mollen went before them through the gate, carrying the rippling white banner of House Stark atop a high standard of grey ash. Theon Greyjoy and the Greatjon fell in on either side of Robb, and their knights formed up in a double column behind them, steel-tipped lances glinting in the sun.
瑞肯拒绝下楼，他红着眼睛，倔强地躲在楼上卧房里。“不要！”当布兰问他要不要跟罗柏说再见时，他大声尖叫，“不要说再见！”
Uncomfortably, he remembered Osha’s words. He’s marching the wrong way , he thought. For an instant he wanted to gallop after him and shout a warning, but when Robb vanished beneath the portcullis, the moment was gone.
“我跟他说过了，”布兰道，“可他说大家都没回来。”
Beyond the castle walls, a roar of sound went up. The foot soldiers and townsfolk were cheering Robb as he rode past, Bran knew; cheering for Lord Stark, for the Lord of Winterfell on his great stallion, with his cloak streaming and Grey Wind racing beside him. They would never cheer for him that way, he realized with a dull ache. He might be the lord in Winterfell while his brother and father were gone, but he was still Bran the Broken. He could not even get off his own horse, except to fall.
“他不能永远当个小孩子。他是史塔克家族的人，已经快满四岁了。”罗柏叹道，“嗯，母亲就快回来了，我也会把父亲带回来，我向你保证。”
When the distant cheers had faded to silence and the yard was empty at last, Winterfell seemed deserted and dead. Bran looked around at the faces of those who remained, women and children and old men … and Hodor. The huge stableboy had a lost and frightened look to his face. “Hodor?” he said sadly.
说完，他调转马头，快步跑开。灰风身形矫健地跟了上去，跑在战马旁边。哈里斯·莫兰走在最前，领头穿过城门，高举史塔克家族的灰白旗帜，旌旗在风中飘动。席恩·葛雷乔伊和大琼恩走在罗柏两侧，骑士们则成两列纵队紧随在后，钢铁枪尖在日光下闪闪发亮。
“Hodor,” Bran agreed, wondering what it meant.
他不安地想起欧莎所说的话，他走错方向了。一时之间，他竟想纵马追上，高声警告，但罗柏很快消失在闸门之外，时机转瞬即逝。
*DAENERYS
城墙之外响起阵阵欢呼，布兰知道这是步兵和镇民在夹道欢送罗柏，欢送史塔克大人，欢送跨骑骏马的临冬城主，他的披风在风中飘动，灰风奔驰于身畔。他突然想到，他们永远也不会这样为他欢呼，心里不禁隐隐作痛。父兄不在时，他或许能暂任临冬城主，但他依旧是“残废的布兰”，连自己下马都做不到，除非是摔下去。
W hen he had taken his pleasure, Khal Drogo rose from their sleeping mats to tower above her. His skin shone dark as bronze in the ruddy light from the brazier, the faint lines of old scars visible on his broad chest. Ink-black hair, loose and unbound, cascaded over his shoulders and down his back, well past his waist. His manhood glistened wetly. The khal’s mouth twisted in a frown beneath the droop of his long mustachio. “The stallion who mounts the world has no need of iron chairs.”
当远处的欢呼声逐渐平息，终归寂静，广场上的部队都离开之后，临冬城仿佛遭人遗弃，了无生气。布兰环顾周遭留下来的老弱妇孺……还有阿多。高个马僮脸上有种失落和害怕的神情。“阿多？”他哀伤地说。
Dany propped herself on an elbow to look up at him, so tall and magnificent. She loved his hair especially. It had never been cut; he had never known defeat. “It was prophesied that the stallion will ride to the ends of the earth,” she said.
“阿多。”布兰附和，心里却不知道那是什么意思。
“The earth ends at the black salt sea,” Drogo answered at once. He wet a cloth in a basin of warm water to wipe the sweat and oil from his skin. “No horse can cross the poison water.”
第五十五章 丹妮莉丝
“In the Free Cities, there are ships by the thousand,” Dany told him, as she had told him before. “Wooden horses with a hundred legs, that fly across the sea on wings full of wind.”
卓戈卡奥满足之后，便从他们睡觉的草席上站起来，高高地立在她身边。在火盆的红润光线照耀下，他的皮肤沉黑有如青铜，旧时伤疤的线条在他宽阔的胸膛上若隐若现。他的墨黑长发松散开来，如瀑布般垂过肩膀，沿着背部直下腰际。卡奥的嘴巴隐藏于长长的胡须之下，这时有些不悦地抿起双唇。“骑着世界的骏马不需要铁椅子。”
Khal Drogo did not want to hear it. “We will speak no more of wooden horses and iron chairs.” He dropped the cloth and began to dress. “This day I will go to the grass and hunt, woman wife,” he announced as he shrugged into a painted vest and buckled on a wide belt with heavy medallions of silver, gold, and bronze.
丹妮用手肘撑起身子，抬头望着他。他是如此雄伟高大，她尤其钟爱他的头发。他从未剪过；因为他从未战败。“预言所载，骏马将行至世界尽头。”她说。
“Yes, my sun-and-stars,” Dany said. Drogo would take his bloodriders and ride in search of hrakkar , the great white lion of the plains. If they returned triumphant, her lord husband’s joy would be fierce, and he might be willing to hear her out.
“世界的尽头是黑色咸海，”卓戈立刻答道。他把布在温水盆里浸湿，揩掉皮肤上的汗水和油。“没有马可以穿越毒水。”
Savage beasts he did not fear, nor any man who had ever drawn breath, but the sea was a different matter. To the Dothraki, water that a horse could not drink was something foul; the heaving grey-green plains of the ocean filled them with superstitious loathing. Drogo was a bolder man than the other horselords in half a hundred ways, she had found … but not in this. If only she could get him onto a ship …
“自由贸易城邦有几千艘船，”丹妮一如既往地告诉他，“它们就像生了几百只脚的木马，能够乘风展翼，横越海洋。”
After the khal and his bloodriders had ridden off with their bows, Dany summoned her handmaids. Her body felt so fat and ungainly now that she welcomed the help of their strong arms and deft hands, whereas before she had often been uncomfortable with the way they fussed and fluttered about her. They scrubbed her clean and dressed her in sandsilk, loose and flowing. As Doreah combed out her hair, she sent Jhiqui to find Ser Jorah Mormont.
卓戈卡奥不想听。“我们不要再谈木马和铁椅子。”他丢下湿布，开始穿衣服。“女人妻子，今天我将到草原上打猎。”他一边穿上彩绘背心，扣上沉重的金银铜章大腰带，一边宣布。
The knight came at once. He wore horsehair leggings and painted vest, like a rider. Coarse black hair covered his thick chest and muscular arms. “My princess. How may I serve you?”
“好的，我的日和星。”丹妮说。卓戈会带他的血盟卫外出寻找“赫拉卡”，就是草原上的大白狮。假如他们得手归来，夫君必是兴高采烈，或许就会听她的话。
“You must talk to my lord husband,” Dany said. “Drogo says the stallion who mounts the world will have all the lands of the earth to rule, and no need to cross the poison water. He talks of leading his khalasar east after Rhaego is born, to plunder the lands around the Jade Sea.”
他不畏凶猛野兽，或是世上任何一人，但海洋却不同。对多斯拉克人而言，只要马不能喝的水就是不洁的东西，波涛汹涌的灰绿洋面让他们有种迷信的憎厌。她很清楚，卓戈在无数方面都比其他马王勇敢……只有这点他做不到。若她有办法让他上船就好了……
The knight looked thoughtful. “The khal has never seen the Seven Kingdoms,” he said. “They are nothing to him. If he thinks of them at all, no doubt he thinks of islands, a few small cities clinging to rocks in the manner of Lorath or Lys, surrounded by stormy seas. The riches of the east must seem a more tempting prospect.”
等卡奥和他的血盟卫带着弓箭离开后，丹妮召来女仆。从前她对于她们东摸西碰感到不适，如今身体越发臃肿笨拙，她反而喜欢她们健壮的臂膀和灵巧的双手。她们为她擦洗干净，穿上松滑的纱丝服饰。多莉亚一边帮她梳头，她一边差姬琪去把乔拉·莫尔蒙爵士找来。
“But he must ride west,” Dany said, despairing. “Please, help me make him understand.” She had never seen the Seven Kingdoms either, no more than Drogo, yet she felt as though she knew them from all the tales her brother had told her. Viserys had promised her a thousand times that he would take her back one day, but he was dead now and his promises had died with him.
骑士立刻前来，他穿着马鬃绑腿，彩绘背心，和多斯拉克人无异。粗黑的体毛覆盖了他厚实的胸膛和健壮的手臂。“公主殿下，请问您有何吩咐？”
“The Dothraki do things in their own time, for their own reasons,” the knight answered. “Have patience, Princess. Do not make your brother’s mistake. We will go home, I promise you.”
“你得和我夫君谈谈，”丹妮说，“卓戈说骑着世界的骏马将统治全世界，但无需横越毒水。他还说等雷戈出生后，要率领卡拉萨往东走，去掠夺玉海沿岸的土地。”
Home? The word made her feel sad. Ser Jorah had his Bear Island, but what was home to her? A few tales, names recited as solemnly as the words of a prayer, the fading memory of a red door … was Vaes Dothrak to be her home forever? When she looked at the crones of the dosh khaleen , was she looking at her future?
骑士似乎若有所思。“卡奥从未见过七大王国，”他说。“七国对他来说什么都不是。就算他真的想过，大概也以为那只是建在一群小岛上的城邦，周围是风暴不息的海洋，就像罗拉斯或里斯那样，相较之下，富饶的东方想必更吸引人罢。”
Ser Jorah must have seen the sadness on her face. “A great caravan arrived during the night, Khaleesi . Four hundred horses, from Pentos by way of Norvos and Qohor, under the command of Merchant Captain Byan Votyris. Illyrio may have sent a letter. Would you care to visit the Western Market?”
“可他一定得朝西走，”丹妮急了起来。“求求你，请帮助我让他了解罢。”其实，她和卓戈一样没见过七大王国，但听了哥哥所说的那些故事，她却觉得自己很熟悉。韦赛里斯承诺过几千几百次有朝一日会带她回家，但他已经死了，所有的诺言自然也都不算数了。
Dany stirred. “Yes,” she said. “I would like that.” The markets came alive when a caravan had come in. You could never tell what treasures the traders might bring this time, and it would be good to hear men speaking Valyrian again, as they did in the Free Cities. “Irri, have them prepare a litter.”
“多斯拉克人行事自有其步调和理由，”骑士回答，“公主，请您耐心等待，不要重蹈你哥哥的覆辙。我们会回家的，我向你保证。”
“I shall tell your khas,” Ser Jorah said, withdrawing.
家？这个字眼令她悲伤。乔拉爵士有熊岛可归，但她的家在哪里？是那几个故事，那几个有如祷词般庄严吟诵的名号，还是回忆中逐渐消逝的红漆大门？……难道维斯·多斯拉克将是她永恒的归宿？当她看着多希卡林的众老妪时，她可是目睹了自己的未来？
If Khal Drogo had been with her, Dany would have ridden her silver. Among the Dothraki, mothers stayed on horseback almost up to the moment of birth, and she did not want to seem weak in her husband’s eyes. But with the khal off hunting, it was pleasant to lie back on soft cushions and be carried across Vaes Dothrak, with red silk curtains to shield her from the sun. Ser Jorah saddled up and rode beside her, with the four young men of her khas and her handmaids.
乔拉爵士应是察觉到她脸上的哀伤。“卡丽熙，昨晚有大批商队进城，足足有四百匹马，他们从潘托斯经诺佛斯和科霍尔而来，由商队统领拜安·佛提利斯领队。伊利里欧曾答应与我们通信联络，说不定捎了信来，您要不要到城西市集去逛一趟？”
The day was warm and cloudless, the sky a deep blue. When the wind blew, she could smell the rich scents of grass and earth. As her litter passed beneath the stolen monuments, she went from sunlight to shadow and back again. Dany swayed along, studying the faces of dead heroes and forgotten kings. She wondered if the gods of burned cities could still answer prayers.
丹妮起身。“好的。”她说，“我很想去。”每当有商队进城，市集便会热闹起来。你永远也不知道这回商人们又带来什么奇珍异宝，况且能听到有人说瓦雷利亚语，总是件很愉快的事情。自由贸易城邦的人都操这种语言。“伊丽，叫人帮我备轿。”
If I were not the blood of the dragon , she thought wistfully, this could be my home . She was khaleesi , she had a strong man and a swift horse, handmaids to serve her, warriors to keep her safe, an honored place in the dosh khaleen awaiting her when she grew old … and in her womb grew a son who would one day bestride the world. That should be enough for any woman … but not for the dragon. With Viserys gone, Daenerys was the last, the very last. She was the seed of kings and conquerors, and so too the child inside her. She must not forget.
“我去通知您的卡斯部众。”乔拉说着也退下。
The Western Market was a great square of beaten earth surrounded by warrens of mud-baked brick, animal pens, whitewashed drinking halls. Hummocks rose from the ground like the backs of great subterranean beasts breaking the surface, yawning black mouths leading down to cool and cavernous storerooms below. The interior of the square was a maze of stalls and crookback aisles, shaded by awnings of woven grass.
如果卓戈卡奥在她身边，丹妮就会骑小银马外出。多斯拉克女性即使怀孕也依旧骑马，只有临盆前夕才是例外，她自然不想在丈夫眼中自承虚弱。不过，既然卡奥已经外出打猎，她便可舒服地躺在靠垫上，坐轿子让人抬着穿越维斯·多斯拉克，还有红丝帷幕为她遮挡骄阳。乔拉爵士策马骑行在她身边，同行的还有四名年轻的卡斯部众与三位女仆。
A hundred merchants and traders were unloading their goods and setting up in stalls when they arrived, yet even so the great market seemed hushed and deserted compared to the teeming bazaars that Dany remembered from Pentos and the other Free Cities. The caravans made their way to Vaes Dothrak from east and west not so much to sell to the Dothraki as to trade with each other, Ser Jorah had explained. The riders let them come and go unmolested, so long as they observed the peace of the sacred city, did not profane the Mother of Mountains or the Womb of the World, and honored the crones of the dosh khaleen with the traditional gifts of salt, silver, and seed. The Dothraki did not truly comprehend this business of buying and selling.
天气和煦无云，晴空湛蓝。微风吹起，她闻到青草和土地的浓郁芬香。轿子从夺自异邦的神祗雕像下经过，她也随之脱离目光，进入阴影，接着再返回日光。一路上，丹妮随着轿子轻轻摇晃，审视着故去的英雄和被遗忘的国王们的脸庞，不知那些曾受人崇敬，如今信徒的城市早已付之一炬的诸神，是否依旧能应许她的祈祷。
Dany liked the strangeness of the Eastern Market too, with all its queer sights and sounds and smells. She often spent her mornings there, nibbling tree eggs, locust pie, and green noodles, listening to the high ululating voices of the spellsingers, gaping at manticores in silver cages and immense grey elephants and the striped black-and-white horses of the Jogos Nhai. She enjoyed watching all the people too: dark solemn Asshai’i and tall pale Qartheen, the bright-eyed men of Yi Ti in monkey-tail hats, warrior maids from Bayasabhad, Shamyriana, and Kayakayanaya with iron rings in their nipples and rubies in their cheeks, even the dour and frightening Shadow Men, who covered their arms and legs and chests with tattoos and hid their faces behind masks. The Eastern Market was a place of wonder and magic for Dany.
假如我不是真龙血脉，她满心思慕地想，这里就会是我的家。她身为卡丽熙，有一个强壮的男人和一匹迅捷的马，还有服侍她的女仆、保护她的武士，年老之后，还有多希卡林受人敬重的地位等着她……而且，在她的子宫里，那有朝一日将统御世界的儿子正日渐成长，对任何女人来说，都应该心满意足……然而对真龙来说，这样却是不够的。韦赛里斯既死，丹妮莉丝便是独一无二的真龙传人，她是国王与征服者的后裔，她体内的孩子也将继承这样的命运。她不敢忘却。
But the Western Market smelled of home.
城西市集占地广大，呈正方形，四周由泥砖小屋、牲畜圈栏，以及石灰粉涂砌的酒厅所环绕。地面突起小丘，宛如无数硕大无朋、潜伏地底的怪兽，脊梁破地而出，张开的黑色大口，直通地下阴凉宽阔的储藏室。方形正中则是一座由摊贩和崎岖过道构成的迷宫，上方用长草织成的天篷遮盖。
As Irri and Jhiqui helped her from her litter, she sniffed, and recognized the sharp odors of garlic and pepper, scents that reminded Dany of days long gone in the alleys of Tyrosh and Myr and brought a fond smile to her face. Under that she smelled the heady sweet perfumes of Lys. She saw slaves carrying bolts of intricate Myrish lace and fine wools in a dozen rich colors. Caravan guards wandered among the aisles in copper helmets and knee-length tunics of quilted yellow cotton, empty scabbards swinging from their woven leather belts. Behind one stall an armorer displayed steel breastplates worked with gold and silver in ornate patterns, and helms hammered in the shapes of fanciful beasts. Next to him was a pretty young woman selling Lannisport goldwork, rings and brooches and torcs and exquisitely wrought medallions suitable for belting. A huge eunuch guarded her stall, mute and hairless, dressed in sweat-stained velvets and scowling at anyone who came close. Across the aisle, a fat cloth trader from Yi Ti was haggling with a Pentoshi over the price of some green dye, the monkey tail on his hat swaying back and forth as he shook his head.
他们抵达之时，上百个商人正忙着卸货摆摊，然而与潘托斯和其他自由贸易城邦的市集广场相比，这里依旧显得宁静而冷清。乔拉爵士向她解释，商队从东西两方来到此处，主要目的不在于和多斯拉克人做买卖，而是与其他商人交易。游牧民族让他们自由来去，只要他们遵守圣城中不得动武的戒条，不亵渎圣母山与世界的子宫湖，并按传统赠与多希卡林老妪盐、银子和种子等礼品即可。其实多斯拉克人并不了解买卖这种行为。
“When I was a little girl, I loved to play in the bazaar,” Dany told Ser Jorah as they wandered down the shady aisle between the stalls. “It was so alive there, all the people shouting and laughing, so many wonderful things to look at … though we seldom had enough coin to buy anything … well, except for a sausage now and again, or honeyfingers … do they have honeyfingers in the Seven Kingdoms, the kind they bake in Tyrosh?”
丹妮也很喜欢城东市集，那里的事物、声音和气味都充满异国情调。她时常整个早上泡在那里，吃吃树卵、蝗虫馅饼和绿面条，听听吟咒师高亢的嚎叫，张大嘴巴看着来自鸠格斯奈，关在银笼子里的狮首蝎尾兽、巨大无比的灰象、以及黑白斑马。她也喜欢观看形形色色的人群：肤色黝黑、表情凝重的亚夏人；高大白皙的魁尔斯人；头戴猴尾帽、眼睛炯炯有神的夷地人；以及来自巴亚撒布哈德、沙米利安纳和卡亚卡亚纳亚等地，乳头串上铁环、两颊镶着红玉的处女战士；甚至是面色阴郁、令人害怕的阴影之民，他们的手、脚和胸膛上都是刺青，脸则用面具遮住。对丹妮而言，城东市集是个充满惊奇和魔法的地方。
“Cakes, are they? I could not say, Princess.” The knight bowed. “If you would pardon me for a time, I will seek out the captain and see if he has letters for us.”
但城西市集，却有家的味道。
“Very well. I’ll help you find him.”
伊丽和姬琪扶她步下轿子，她借机嗅了一下，立刻辨出大蒜和胡椒的辛辣味道，令她回忆起从前在泰洛西和密尔巷弄里的日子，不禁开心地笑了出来。在这些味道之外，她又闻到里斯甜腻得令人头晕目眩的香水味。她看见奴隶背着繁重的密尔蕾丝和十数种颜色的高级羊毛。商队守卫戴着赤铜盔，身披加衬里的黄棉及膝长袍，逡巡于过道之间，空空的剑鞘悬荡在皮腰带上。一个盔甲师父站在摊贩后面，展示着用金银雕饰的精钢胸甲，以及打造成珍禽异兽形状的头盔。在他的摊贩隔壁，有个年轻美妇正在贩售兰尼斯港的金饰，包括戒指、胸针、手镯和精工雕琢、可做成腰带的奖章。她身旁站了一个高大魁梧的太监，不发一语、全身无毛，汗水渗透了他的天鹅绒衣服，他对每个靠近的人都皱眉怒视。走道对面，一位来自夷地的肥胖布商正和一个潘托斯人争论某种绿色染料的价钱，他不停摇头，帽子上的猴尾巴也跟着前后晃动。
“There is no need for you to trouble yourself.” Ser Jorah glanced away impatiently. “Enjoy the market. I will rejoin you when my business is concluded.”
“我小时候最喜欢在市集里玩。”丹妮一边同乔拉爵士穿梭于摊位间的遮荫过道，一边对他说，“那里最有活力了，到处都是人，又叫又笑，还有好多新奇事物……虽然我们通常什么也买不起……嗯，除了偶尔买条香肠，或是蜂蜜棒……七大王国里有蜂蜜棒吗？就泰洛西烤的那种？”
Curious , Dany thought as she watched him stride off through the throngs. She didn’t see why she should not go with him. Perhaps Ser Jorah meant to find a woman after he met with the merchant captain. Whores frequently traveled with the caravans, she knew, and some men were queerly shy about their couplings. She gave a shrug. “Come,” she told the others.
“是蛋糕吗？公主殿下，我不知道。”骑士一鞠躬，“请容我暂时告退，我要去找商队统领，看看有没有给我们的信。”
Her handmaids trailed along as Dany resumed her stroll through the market. “Oh, look,” she exclaimed to Doreah, “those are the kind of sausages I meant.” She pointed to a stall where a wizened little woman was grilling meat and onions on a hot firestone. “They make them with lots of garlic and hot peppers.” Delighted with her discovery, Dany insisted the others join her for a sausage. Her handmaids wolfed theirs down giggling and grinning, though the men of her khas sniffed at the grilled meat suspiciously. “They taste different than I remember,” Dany said after her first few bites.
“太好了，我也帮你找。”
“In Pentos, I make them with pork,” the old woman said, “but all my pigs died on the Dothraki sea. These are made of horsemeat, Khaleesi , but I spice them the same.”
“不必劳动您，”乔拉爵士有些不耐烦地瞄了远处一眼。“请您尽情享受这市集罢，我办完事立刻回来。”
“Oh.” Dany felt disappointed, but Quaro liked his sausage so well he decided to have another one, and Rakharo had to outdo him and eat three more, belching loudly. Dany giggled.
这真是奇了，丹妮目送他大步走进人群，心里想着。她想不出有何原因不便让她同行。或许乔拉爵士见了商队统领之后想找个女人吧。她知道妓女通常会随商队行走各地，也知道男人对房事特别难以启齿，于是她耸耸肩。“走罢。”她对其他人说。
“You have not laughed since your brother the Khal Rhaggat was crowned by Drogo,” said Irri. “It is good to see, Khaleesi.”
丹妮继续在市集里闲逛，她的女仆跟在后面。“啊，你看，”她惊喜地对多莉亚说，“我说的就是这种香肠。”她指指一个摊贩，一位佝偻的矮小妇人正在一颗滚烫的火石上烤着肉和洋葱。“他们加很多的大蒜和辣椒。”惊喜于自己的发现，丹妮坚持其他人也一起尝尝。女仆“咯咯”笑着大口吃完，她的卡斯部众却满腹狐疑地嗅了嗅烤肉。“吃起来和我印象中不一样。”丹妮吃了几口后评说。
Dany smiled shyly. It was sweet to laugh. She felt half a girl again.
“在潘托斯，我是用猪肉做的，”老妇人说，“可我的猪通通死在多斯拉克海上。所以这是用马肉做的，卡丽熙，不过酱料完全一样。”
They wandered for half the morning. She saw a beautiful feathered cloak from the Summer Isles, and took it for a gift. In return, she gave the merchant a silver medallion from her belt. That was how it was done among the Dothraki. A birdseller taught a green-and-red parrot to say her name, and Dany laughed again, yet still refused to take him. What would she do with a green-and-red parrot in a khalasar? She did take a dozen flasks of scented oils, the perfumes of her childhood; she had only to close her eyes and sniff them and she could see the big house with the red door once more. When Doreah looked longingly at a fertility charm at a magician’s booth, Dany took that too and gave it to the handmaid, thinking that now she should find something for Irri and Jhiqui as well.
“噢。”丹妮觉得有些失望，但是魁洛满喜欢吃，决定再来一根，拉卡洛不甘示弱，结果吃了三根，连连大声打嗝，看得丹妮“咯咯”直笑。
Turning a corner, they came upon a wine merchant offering thimble-sized cups of his wares to the passersby. “Sweet reds,” he cried in fluent Dothraki, “I have sweet reds, from Lys and Volantis and the Arbor. Whites from Lys, Tyroshi pear brandy, firewine, pepperwine, the pale green nectars of Myr. Smokeberry browns and Andalish sours, I have them, I have them.” He was a small man, slender and handsome, his flaxen hair curled and perfumed after the fashion of Lys. When Dany paused before his stall, he bowed low. “A taste for the khaleesi? I have a sweet red from Dorne, my lady, it sings of plums and cherries and rich dark oak. A cask, a cup, a swallow? One taste, and you will name your child after me.”
“自从您的哥哥拉迦特卡奥被卓戈戴上王冠之后，您就没再笑过。”伊丽说，“卡丽熙，看到您笑，是一件很美的事。”
Dany smiled. “My son has his name, but I will try your summerwine,” she said in Valyrian, Valyrian as they spoke it in the Free Cities. The words felt strange on her tongue, after so long. “Just a taste, if you would be so kind.”
丹妮怯怯地微笑。能笑真的好棒好美，她觉得自己仿佛又成了小女孩。
The merchant must have taken her for Dothraki, with her clothes and her oiled hair and sun-browned skin. When she spoke, he gaped at her in astonishment. “My lady, you are … Tyroshi? Can it be so?”
他们晃了大半个早上，她看上一件盛夏群岛的漂亮羽毛斗篷，随后接受了对方的馈赠，她也从腰带上解下一个银牌奖章回送给商人，多斯拉克人就是这样交易的。有个养鸟人教一只红绿相间的鹦鹉说她的名字，丹妮又笑了，但她还是没收下那只鸟，毕竟带着一只红绿鹦鹉在卡拉萨里有什么用呢？她倒是收下十来罐香油，那是属于她童年记忆的香水；她只需闭上眼睛，深深吸气，那栋红门宅院便会在眼前浮现。她见多莉亚以渴望的目光看着魔法师摊位上的丰饶护身符，就收下来送给侍女，心想也该找些别的送给伊丽和姬琪。
“My speech may be Tyroshi, and my garb Dothraki, but I am of Westeros, of the Sunset Kingdoms,” Dany told him.
转了个弯，他们来到一名酒商的摊贩前，那人正拿着精制的小陶杯请经过的人喝。“香甜的红酒啰，”他用流利的多斯拉克语喊，“我有里斯、瓦兰提斯和青亭岛产的香甜红酒、里斯产的白酒、泰洛西产的梨子白兰地、火酒、胡椒酒和密尔产的淡绿神酒、烟莓棕酒和安达尔酸酒，我通通都有，通通都有啰。”他个头很小，生得纤瘦而英俊，淡黄头发梳成里斯流行的款式，烫卷中搽了香水。当丹妮停在他摊位前时，他深深鞠躬，“卡丽熙，您要不要尝一口？尊贵的夫人，我有多恩产的夏日红酒，乃是用蜜李、樱桃和漂亮的黑橡木酿成。您是要一桶、一杯、还是一口？您只需喝上一口，保证会用我的名字为孩子命名。”
Doreah stepped up beside her. “You have the honor to address Daenerys of the House Targaryen, Daenerys Stormborn, khaleesi of the riding men and princess of the Seven Kingdoms.”
丹妮浅浅一笑。“我儿子已经有名字了，不过我还是尝尝你的夏日红吧。”她用自由贸易城邦口音的瓦雷利亚语说。这么久没用，讲起来还真有些古怪。“一口就好，麻烦你了。”
The wine merchant dropped to his knees. “Princess,” he said, bowing his head.
由于她的衣着、抹油的头发和晒黑的皮肤，那商人原本一定把她当成多斯拉克人了，所以当她开口说话时，他吃惊地张大了嘴。“尊贵的夫人，您是……泰洛西人吗？是么？”
“Rise,” Dany commanded him. “I would still like to taste that summerwine you spoke of.”
“我说话或许有泰洛西口音，穿的或许是多斯拉克服饰，但我却是日落国度的维斯特洛人。”丹妮告诉他。
The man bounded to his feet. “That? Dornish swill. It is not worthy of a princess. I have a dry red from the Arbor, crisp and delectable. Please, let me give you a cask.”
多莉亚走到她身边。“你有幸与马上民族的卡丽熙、七大王国的公主，坦格利安家族的‘风暴降生’丹妮莉丝说话。”
Khal Drogo’s visits to the Free Cities had given him a taste for good wine, and Dany knew that such a noble vintage would please him. “You honor me, ser,” she murmured sweetly.
酒商连忙跪下。“公主殿下。”他低头道。
“The honor is mine.” The merchant rummaged about in the back of his stall and produced a small oaken cask. Burned into the wood was a cluster of grapes. “The Redwyne sigil,” he said, pointing, “for the Arbor. There is no finer drink.”
“起来吧，”丹妮命令他，“我还想尝尝你的夏日红呢。”
“Khal Drogo and I will share it together. Aggo, take this back to my litter, if you’d be so kind.” The wineseller beamed as the Dothraki hefted the cask.
商人一跃起身，“您是说刚才那个？那是多恩的猪饲料，配不上公主您的。我有一种青亭岛产的干红，喝起来既甘甜又爽口。请让我荣幸地送您一桶罢。”
She did not realize that Ser Jorah had returned until she heard the knight say, “No.” His voice was strange, brusque. “Aggo, put down that cask.”
卓戈卡奥在几次做客自由贸易城邦的过程中，养成了对好酒的喜爱，丹妮知道如此名贵的陈酿定会讨他欢心。“您太客气了，先生。”她甜甜地轻声说。
Aggo looked at Dany. She gave a hesitant nod. “Ser Jorah, is something wrong?”
“这是我的荣幸。”商人在摊位后面翻找半天，拿出一个小木桶。桶子的木头上烙了葡萄串的图案。“这是雷德温家族的标志，”他指着说，“青亭岛的特产，世上没有比这更好的东西。”
“I have a thirst. Open it, wineseller.”
“而卓戈卡奥将与我共饮此酒。阿戈，麻烦你把这个拿回我的轿子。”多斯拉克武士搬起酒桶时，酒商的眼睛整个亮了起来。
The merchant frowned. “The wine is for the khaleesi , not for the likes of you, ser.”
她没察觉乔拉爵士已经返回，直到她听见骑士喝道：“慢着！”他的声音怪异而粗鲁。“阿戈，把那桶酒放下。”
Ser Jorah moved closer to the stall. “If you don’t open it, I’ll crack it open with your head.” He carried no weapons here in the sacred city, save his hands—yet his hands were enough, big, hard, dangerous, his knuckles covered with coarse dark hairs. The wineseller hesitated a moment, then took up his hammer and knocked the plug from the cask.
阿戈看看丹妮，她有些犹豫地点点头。“乔拉爵士，有什么不对？”
“Pour,” Ser Jorah commanded. The four young warriors of Dany’s khas arrayed themselves behind him, frowning, watching with their dark, almond-shaped eyes.
“我口正渴，老板，把酒打开。”
“It would be a crime to drink this rich a wine without letting it breathe.” The wineseller had not put his hammer down.
酒贩皱起眉头。“爵士，酒是要送给卡丽熙，不是给你这种人喝的。”
Jhogo reached for the whip coiled at his belt, but Dany stopped him with a light touch on the arm. “Do as Ser Jorah says,” she said. People were stopping to watch.
乔拉爵士走近摊位。“你如果不打开，我就用你的头敲开。”碍于圣城戒律，他并未携带武器，仅有双手——然而他那双手强壮结实、肌肉虬张，关节上长满黑毛，散发出危险的气息。酒商迟疑了一会儿，终于拿起锤子，敲开封盖。
The man gave her a quick, sullen glance. “As the princess commands.” He had to set aside his hammer to lift the cask. He filled two thimble-sized tasting cups, pouring so deftly he did not spill a drop.
“倒酒。”乔拉爵士下令。丹妮卡斯部众的四名年轻武士在他身后一字排开，睁大黑色的杏仁眼，皱起眉头看着他。
Ser Jorah lifted a cup and sniffed at the wine, frowning.
“这么好的酒，假如不让它先透透气就喝，简直是滔天大罪啊。”酒商的锤子没有放下。
“Sweet, isn’t it?” the wineseller said, smiling. “Can you smell the fruit, ser? The perfume of the Arbor. Taste it, my lord, and tell me it isn’t the finest, richest wine that’s ever touched your tongue.”
乔戈伸手要取盘在腰间的鞭子，但丹妮轻触他的手臂，表示制止。“照乔拉爵士说的做。”她说。附近的人纷纷驻足观看。
Ser Jorah offered him the cup. “You taste it first.”
那人飞快地看了她一眼，神情充满怨怒。“谨遵公主殿下吩咐。”他放下锤子，挪动酒桶，小心翼翼地倒了两小杯，一滴也没洒出。
“Me?” The man laughed. “I am not worthy of this vintage, my lord. And it’s a poor wine merchant who drinks up his own wares.” His smile was amiable, yet she could see the sheen of sweat on his brow.
乔拉爵士举起一杯，皱着眉闻了闻。
“You will drink,” Dany said, cold as ice. “Empty the cup, or I will tell them to hold you down while Ser Jorah pours the whole cask down your throat.”
“很香吧？”酒商笑眯眯地说，“爵士先生，您可闻出了葡萄的香气？青亭岛的特产哟。大人，就请您先尝尝，然后再告诉我这是不是您喝过的最甘甜最浓郁的酒。”
The wineseller shrugged, reached for the cup … and grabbed the cask instead, flinging it at her with both hands. Ser Jorah bulled into her, knocking her out of the way. The cask bounced off his shoulder and smashed open on the ground. Dany stumbled and lost her feet. “No,” she screamed, thrusting her hands out to break her fall … and Doreah caught her by the arm and wrenched her backward, so she landed on her legs and not her belly.
乔拉爵士把酒递给他。“你先喝。”
The trader vaulted over the stall, darting between Aggo and Rakharo. Quaro reached for an arakh that was not there as the blond man slammed him aside. He raced down the aisle. Dany heard the snap of Jhogo’s whip, saw the leather lick out and coil around the wineseller’s leg. The man sprawled face first in the dirt.
“我？”那人笑笑，“大人，我不够格喝这么好的酒，更何况哪有酒贩子喝自己的酒呢？”他的笑容虽然和蔼可亲，但她却看到他额间布满汗珠。
A dozen caravan guards had come running. With them was the master himself, Merchant Captain Byan Votyris, a diminutive Norvoshi with skin like old leather and a bristling blue mustachio that swept up to his ears. He seemed to know what had happened without a word being spoken. “Take this one away to await the pleasure of the khal,” he commanded, gesturing at the man on the ground. Two guards hauled the wineseller to his feet. “His goods I gift to you as well, Princess,” the merchant captain went on. “Small token of regret, that one of mine would do this thing.”
“叫你喝你就喝。”丹妮口气冰冷地说，“把这杯喝干，不然我就叫他们抓住你，让乔拉爵士把整桶灌进你喉咙。”
Doreah and Jhiqui helped Dany back to her feet. The poisoned wine was leaking from the broken cask into the dirt. “How did you know?” she asked Ser Jorah, trembling. “How?”
酒商耸耸肩，伸手去拿杯子……结果却双手抓起酒桶，朝她掷来。乔拉爵士连忙用力一撞，把她整个人推开，酒桶滚过他的肩膀，落地裂开。丹妮重心不稳跌了一跤。“哎呀！”她尖叫着想伸手撑地……幸好多莉亚及时抓住她的手臂往后一拉，所以她是双脚着地，腹部没有受碰撞。
“I did not know, Khaleesi , not until the man refused to drink, but once I read Magister Illyrio’s letter, I feared.” His dark eyes swept over the faces of the strangers in the market. “Come. Best not to talk of it here.”
酒商翻身跳过摊位，从阿戈和拉卡洛中间窜了出去，撞开伸手想拿亚拉克弯刀、却扑了个空的魁洛，然后沿着过道逃走。丹妮听到乔戈的鞭子啪啦，只见皮鞭如舌头般窜出，卷住酒贩的脚，这金发男子登时面朝下仆倒在地。
Dany was near tears as they carried her back. The taste in her mouth was one she had known before: fear. For years she had lived in terror of Viserys, afraid of waking the dragon. This was even worse. It was not just for herself that she feared now, but for her baby. He must have sensed her fright, for he moved restlessly inside her. Dany stroked the swell of her belly gently, wishing she could reach him, touch him, soothe him. “You are the blood of the dragon, little one,” she whispered as her litter swayed along, curtains drawn tight. “You are the blood of the dragon, and the dragon does not fear.”
十来个商队守卫快步赶来，商队统领拜安·佛提利斯也来了。他是个诺佛斯人，皮肤有如老旧皮革，身材矮小，蓝色竖胡直上耳际。他一句话也没问，似乎就明白发生了什么。“把这人带走，听候卡奥发落。”他指着地上的人下令，两名守卫随即架起酒贩。“公主殿下，请收下他的酒当礼物。”商队统领继续说，“算是一点不成敬意的补偿，没想到我们商队里竟有人干出这种事，真对不住。”
Under the hollow hummock of earth that was her home in Vaes Dothrak, Dany ordered them to leave her—all but Ser Jorah. “Tell me,” she commanded as she lowered herself onto her cushions. “Was it the Usurper?”
多莉亚和姬琪扶着丹妮站起来，毒酒正从裂开的酒桶缓缓流到泥地上。“你怎么知道？”她颤抖着问乔拉爵士。“你怎么知道？”
“Yes.” The knight drew out a folded parchment. “A letter to Viserys, from Magister Illyrio. Robert Baratheon offers lands and lordships for your death, or your brother’s.”
“卡丽熙，本来我也不知，是看他不肯喝酒方才确定。先前我读了伊利里欧总督的信，就害怕会有这种事发生。”他深色的眼睛环视着市集里围观的陌生人群。“走吧，不适合在这里谈。”
“My brother?” Her sob was half a laugh. “He does not know yet, does he? The Usurper owes Drogo a lordship.” This time her laugh was half a sob. She hugged herself protectively. “And me, you said. Only me?”
他们抬她回去时，丹妮几乎要哭出来。嘴里这种味道她早已尝过：恐惧。她长年生活在对韦赛里斯的恐惧当中，害怕唤醒睡龙之怒，现在的情形却更糟。如今她不只为自己害怕，还要担心肚子里的胎儿。他想必是察觉了她的恐惧，因此在她体内不安地胎动着。丹妮轻抚隆起的肚子，希望她可以伸手触碰他、搂抱他、抚慰他。“小宝贝，你是真龙传人呢。”轿子帘幕紧掩，微微摇晃，她也随之晃动，“真龙传人哟，龙是不会害怕的。”
“You and the child,” Ser Jorah said, grim.
回到她在维斯·多斯拉克的空心圆丘后，丹妮吩咐人们全部退下——除了乔拉爵士。“告诉我，”她在靠垫上缓缓躺下，同时命令道，“是‘篡夺者’下的令吗？”
“No. He cannot have my son.” She would not weep, she decided. She would not shiver with fear. The Usurper has woken the dragon now , she told herself … and her eyes went to the dragon’s eggs resting in their nest of dark velvet. The shifting lamplight limned their stony scales, and shimmering motes of jade and scarlet and gold swam in the air around them, like courtiers around a king.
“是的，”骑士取出一张卷起的羊皮纸。“这是伊利里欧总督写给韦赛里斯的信。信中说，劳勃·拜拉席恩已经下令，只要有人能杀了你或你哥哥，即可受领封地成为贵族。”
Was it madness that seized her then, born of fear? Or some strange wisdom buried in her blood? Dany could not have said. She heard her own voice saying, “Ser Jorah, light the brazier.”
“我哥哥？”她的啜泣中有一半是笑。“他还不知道，是不是？这么说来篡夺者欠卓戈一个领主封号。”这次是她的笑声夹杂着啜泣，她保护性地紧抱住自己。“你说还有我，是吗？只有我吗？”
“Khaleesi?” The knight looked at her strangely. “It is so hot. Are you certain?”
“你和你的孩子。”乔拉爵士脸色凝重地说。
She had never been so certain. “Yes. I … I have a chill. Light the brazier.”
“不行，他绝不能伤害我儿子。”她暗自决定，自己绝不会哭，也不会恐惧发抖。篡夺者唤醒了睡龙之怒，她对自己说……然后她把视线转移到躺在深色天鹅绒上的龙蛋。摇曳的灯光描绘出它们石面的鳞甲，将周遭空气的微尘染成鲜红和金黄，宛如国王身边的廷臣。
He bowed. “As you command.”
接下来紧紧攫住她念头的，是因恐惧而生的疯狂，还是某种潜藏于血脉之中的怪异智慧？丹妮说不准。她只听见自己的声音道：“乔拉爵士，点起火盆。”
When the coals were afire, Dany sent Ser Jorah from her. She had to be alone to do what she must do. This is madness , she told herself as she lifted the black-and-scarlet egg from the velvet. It will only crack and burn, and it’s so beautiful, Ser Jorah will call me a fool if I ruin it , and yet, and yet …
“卡丽熙？”骑士眼神怪异地看着她。“天这么热，您确定吗？”
Cradling the egg with both hands, she carried it to the fire and pushed it down amongst the burning coals. The black scales seemed to glow as they drank the heat. Flames licked against the stone with small red tongues. Dany placed the other two eggs beside the black one in the fire. As she stepped back from the brazier, the breath trembled in her throat.
她这辈子从未如此确定。“是的。我……我受了点风寒，把火盆点上。”
She watched until the coals had turned to ashes. Drifting sparks floated up and out of the smokehole. Heat shimmered in waves around the dragon’s eggs. And that was all.
他鞠了个躬。“如您所愿。”
Your brother Rhaegar was the last dragon , Ser Jorah had said. Dany gazed at her eggs sadly. What had she expected? A thousand thousand years ago they had been alive, but now they were only pretty rocks. They could not make a dragon. A dragon was air and fire. Living flesh, not dead stone.
煤炭烧起来后，丹妮将乔拉爵士遣走。她必须在无人注视的情况下才敢完成。真是疯狂之举，她一边对自己说，一边将那颗黑红交杂的蛋从天鹅绒上拿起来。蛋只会燃烧崩裂，那将是多么美丽的景象，乔拉爵士若知道我毁了龙蛋。一定会说我是个傻子。可是，可是……
The brazier was cold again by the time Khal Drogo returned. Cohollo was leading a packhorse behind him, with the carcass of a great white lion slung across its back. Above, the stars were coming out. The khal laughed as he swung down off his stallion and showed her the scars on his leg where the hrakkar had raked him through his leggings. “I shall make you a cloak of its skin, moon of my life,” he swore.
她两手捧着龙蛋，走到火边，往下一放，把它与燃烧的煤炭放在一起。黑色的龙鳞仿佛在啜饮高热，熠熠发光，细小的红火舌舔着石头表面。丹妮将另外两颗蛋也放进火里，靠在黑的那颗旁边，然后她从火盆边退开，颤抖得喘不过气来。
When Dany told him what had happened at the market, all laughter stopped, and Khal Drogo grew very quiet.
她在旁观看，直到炭火只余灰烬，游移的火星自排烟口飘腾而出，热气在龙蛋周围波荡闪亮，最后归于平静。
“This poisoner was the first,” Ser Jorah Mormont warned him, “but he will not be the last. Men will risk much for a lordship.”
你大哥雷加是最后的真龙传人，乔拉爵士曾对她这么说。丹妮哀伤地望着龙蛋，她究竟在期待什么？千万年前它们有生命，如今不过是漂亮石头罢了。它们不可能变成龙。真正的龙能腾空飞翔，喷吐烈焰，是活生生的血肉，而非死板板的顽石。
Drogo was silent for a time. Finally he said, “This seller of poisons ran from the moon of my life. Better he should run after her. So he will. Jhogo, Jorah the Andal, to each of you I say, choose any horse you wish from my herds, and it is yours. Any horse save my red and the silver that was my bride gift to the moon of my life. I make this gift to you for what you did.
卓戈卡奥归来时，火盆已然冷却。科霍罗领着一匹驮马走在他后面，马背上挂着一头巨大的白狮。头顶的苍穹，星星就要出来了。卡奥笑着翻身下马，向她展示赫拉卡的爪子刮破绑腿所留下的伤痕。“我将用它的皮为你做一件斗篷，我生命中的月亮。”他对天发誓。
“And to Rhaego son of Drogo, the stallion who will mount the world, to him I also pledge a gift. To him I will give this iron chair his mother’s father sat in. I will give him Seven Kingdoms. I, Drogo, khal , will do this thing.” His voice rose, and he lifted his fist to the sky. “I will take my khalasar west to where the world ends, and ride the wooden horses across the black salt water as no khal has done before. I will kill the men in the iron suits and tear down their stone houses. I will rape their women, take their children as slaves, and bring their broken gods back to Vaes Dothrak to bow down beneath the Mother of Mountains. This I vow, I, Drogo son of Bharbo. This I swear before the Mother of Mountains, as the stars look down in witness.”
丹妮把在市集发生的事告诉他之后，所有的笑容都停住了，卓戈卡奥变得非常安静。
His khalasar left Vaes Dothrak two days later, striking south and west across the plains. Khal Drogo led them on his great red stallion, with Daenerys beside him on her silver. The wineseller hurried behind them, naked, on foot, chained at throat and wrists. His chains were fastened to the halter of Dany’s silver. As she rode, he ran after her, barefoot and stumbling. No harm would come to him … so long as he kept up.
“这个下毒的人是第一个，”乔拉·莫尔蒙爵士警告他，“但绝不会是最后一个。为了贵族封号，很多人会铤而走险。”
*CATELYN
卓戈沉默了一阵子，最后他说：“这个卖毒药的人，想从我生命中的月亮身边逃走，那就让他跟在她后面跑，让他跑。乔戈，安达尔人乔拉，我对你们两人说，从我的马群里挑选任何一匹——除了我自己的红马和我送给我生命的月亮做为新娘礼的银马——它就是你们的了。我送给你们这件礼物，是为了感谢你们的功绩。”
I t was too far to make out the banners clearly, but even through the drifting fog she could see that they were white, with a dark smudge in their center that could only be the direwolf of Stark, grey upon its icy field. When she saw it with her own eyes, Catelyn reined up her horse and bowed her head in thanks. The gods were good. She was not too late.
“至于卓戈之子雷戈，骑着世界的骏马，我也要送他一件礼物。我要送他那张他母亲的父亲曾经坐过的铁椅子，我要送他七大王国。我，卓戈，卡奥，要做这件事。”他的音量渐高，举起拳头对天呼喊，“我要带着我的卡拉萨向西走到世界尽头，骑着木马横渡黑色咸水，做出古往今来其他卡奥都从来没有做过的事。我要杀死穿铁衣服的人，拆了他们的石头房子，我要强奸他们的女人，抓他们的小孩来做奴隶，把他们无用的神像带回维斯·多斯拉克，向圣母山行礼。我，拔尔勃之子卓戈在此发誓，在圣母山前发誓，以天上群星为证。”
“They await our coming, my lady,” Ser Wylis Manderly said, “as my lord father swore they would.”
两天后，他的卡拉萨离开维斯·多斯拉克，往西南穿越草原。卓戈卡奥骑着红色骏马领路在前，丹妮莉丝骑着小银马紧跟在他身边。至于那个酒贩，则裸着身子，赤脚跑在后面。他的脖颈和手腕绑着锁链，锁链很长，一直系到丹妮银马的辔头上。她一边骑，他一边跟着她跑，赤裸双脚，步履踉跄。他不会受到任何伤害……只要他跟上。
“Let us not keep them waiting any longer, ser.” Ser Brynden Tully put the spurs to his horse and trotted briskly toward the banners. Catelyn rode beside him.
第五十六章 凯特琳
Ser Wylis and his brother Ser Wendel followed, leading their levies, near fifteen hundred men: some twenty-odd knights and as many squires, two hundred mounted lances, swordsmen, and freeriders, and the rest foot, armed with spears, pikes and tridents. Lord Wyman had remained behind to see to the defenses of White Harbor. A man of near sixty years, he had grown too stout to sit a horse. “If I had thought to see war again in my lifetime, I should have eaten a few less eels,” he’d told Catelyn when he met her ship, slapping his massive belly with both hands. His fingers were fat as sausages. “My boys will see you safe to your son, though, have no fear.”
虽然距离尚远，无法看清旗帜上的图案，但透过迷朦雾气，她依旧瞧得出那是白色旌旗，中间暗色一点只可能是史塔克家族的灰色冰原奔狼。一会儿，待亲眼目睹之后，凯特琳勒住马缰，低头感谢天上诸神，她总算没有来得太迟。
His “boys” were both older than Catelyn, and she might have wished that they did not take after their father quite so closely. Ser Wylis was only a few eels short of not being able to mount his own horse; she pitied the poor animal. Ser Wendel, the younger boy, would have been the fattest man she’d ever known, had she only neglected to meet his father and brother. Wylis was quiet and formal, Wendel loud and boisterous; both had ostentatious walrus mustaches and heads as bare as a baby’s bottom; neither seemed to own a single garment that was not spotted with food stains. Yet she liked them well enough; they had gotten her to Robb, as their father had vowed, and nothing else mattered.
“夫人，他们正等着我们过去呢，”威里斯·曼德勒爵士道，“如我父亲所保证的。”
She was pleased to see that her son had sent eyes out, even to the east. The Lannisters would come from the south when they came, but it was good that Robb was being careful. My son is leading a host to war , she thought, still only half believing it. She was desperately afraid for him, and for Winterfell, yet she could not deny feeling a certain pride as well. A year ago he had been a boy. What was he now? she wondered.
“那我们就别让他们再等下去吧，爵士先生。”布林登·徒利爵士轻踢马刺，快步朝前奔去，凯特琳策马与之并肩而行。
Outriders spied the Manderly banners—the white merman with trident in hand, rising from a blue-green sea—and hailed them warmly. They were led to a spot of high ground dry enough for a camp. Ser Wylis called a halt there, and remained behind with his men to see the fires laid and the horses tended, while his brother Wendel rode on with Catelyn and her uncle to present their father’s respects to their liege lord.
威里斯爵士和他的弟弟文德尔爵士跟在后面，率领着为数将近一千五百名士兵：其中包括二十来位骑士和相同数目的侍从，两百名或持枪或佩剑的骑马战士与自由骑手，其余则是配备长矛、长枪和三叉戟的步兵。威曼伯爵留在后方负责白港的防御，他已年过六旬，体态臃肿得无法再骑马作战。“我若知道这辈子还会遇上打仗，就应该少吃几条鳗鱼。”前来接船时，他这么对凯特琳说，一边还双手拍拍大肚子，那指头肥得跟香肠没两样。“不过呢，您用不着担心，我家这两个小鬼会护送您平安达到您儿子那边的。”
The ground under their horses’ hooves was soft and wet. It fell away slowly beneath them as they rode past smoky peat fires, lines of horses, and wagons heavy-laden with hardbread and salt beef. On a stony outcrop of land higher than the surrounding country, they passed a lord’s pavilion with walls of heavy sailcloth. Catelyn recognized the banner, the bull moose of the Hornwoods, brown on its dark orange field.
他的两个“小鬼”年纪都比凯特琳大，她还真希望他父子三人不要长得那么相像。威里斯爵士若是再重一点，大概也骑不成马了；她真心怜悯他的坐骑。年纪较轻的文德尔爵士也算得上是她所知最胖的人——假如她没遇见他父亲和哥哥的话。威里斯为人沉默多礼，文德尔则粗声粗气，两人都有大把海象式的长胡子，头秃得像新生婴儿的屁股，而且几乎每件衣服都沾染了食物痕迹。不过，她挺喜欢他们，他们依约护送她到了罗柏身边，如他们父亲所保证的，这样就足够了。
Just beyond, through the mists, she glimpsed the walls and towers of Moat Cailin … or what remained of them. Immense blocks of black basalt, each as large as a crofter’s cottage, lay scattered and tumbled like a child’s wooden blocks, half-sunk in the soft boggy soil. Nothing else remained of a curtain wall that had once stood as high as Winterfell’s. The wooden keep was gone entirely, rotted away a thousand years past, with not so much as a timber to mark where it had stood. All that was left of the great stronghold of the First Men were three towers … three where there had once been twenty, if the taletellers could be believed.
看到儿子连东边也派出了斥候，她感到很高兴。兰尼斯特军出现时会在南方，但罗柏谨慎行事毕竟是好的。我儿正领军出征，她心里想，依然不太敢相信。她非常为他，也为临冬城担心害怕，但她不能否认心里也同样感到骄傲。一年之前，他还只是个孩子，如今的他变成什么样了？她不禁纳闷。
The Gatehouse Tower looked sound enough, and even boasted a few feet of standing wall to either side of it. The Drunkard’s Tower, off in the bog where the south and west walls had once met, leaned like a man about to spew a bellyful of wine into the gutter. And the tall, slender Children’s Tower, where legend said the children of the forest had once called upon their nameless gods to send the hammer of the waters, had lost half its crown. It looked as if some great beast had taken a bite out of the crenellations along the tower top, and spit the rubble across the bog. All three towers were green with moss. A tree was growing out between the stones on the north side of the Gatehouse Tower, its gnarled limbs festooned with ropy white blankets of ghostskin.
骑马斥候看见了曼德勒家族的旗帜——手握三叉戟的白色人鱼，自蓝绿海洋中缓缓升起——便热情地招呼他们。他们被领到一处干燥、可供扎营的高地，威里斯爵士命令军队停在那里，升起营火，照料马匹。他的弟弟文德尔则陪伴凯特琳和她叔叔，代表他父亲去向少主致意。
“Gods have mercy,” Ser Brynden exclaimed when he saw what lay before them. “This is Moat Cailin? It’s no more than a—”
马蹄下的土地湿软不堪，随着踩踏缓缓下陷。他们行经煤烟袅袅的营火，一排排的战马，满载硬面包和咸牛肉的货车。在一个地势较高的裸岩上，他们经过了一座用厚重帆布搭建而成的领主帐篷。凯特琳认出霍伍德家族的旗帜，褐色驼鹿衬着暗橙色底。
“—death trap,” Catelyn finished. “I know how it looks, Uncle. I thought the same the first time I saw it, but Ned assured me that this ruin is more formidable than it seems. The three surviving towers command the causeway from all sides, and any enemy must pass between them. The bogs here are impenetrable, full of quicksands and suckholes and teeming with snakes. To assault any of the towers, an army would need to wade through waist-deep black muck, cross a moat full of lizard-lions, and scale walls slimy with moss, all the while exposing themselves to fire from archers in the other towers.” She gave her uncle a grim smile. “And when night falls, there are said to be ghosts, cold vengeful spirits of the north who hunger for southron blood.”
稍远处，透过雾气，她瞥见了卡林湾的高墙塔楼……或者应该说，高墙塔楼的遗迹。一块块大如农舍的黑色玄武岩四处倾颓，活像小孩的积木，半沉进湿软的沼地泥泞。而由它们所筑成的、曾与临冬城等高的城墙，业已完全消失；木造的堡楼更在千年前便已腐烂蛀蚀，如今连半根木头都不剩，再也看不出辉煌一时的痕迹。先民所建筑的雄伟要塞只剩三座高塔……而说书人却说古时曾有二十座。
Ser Brynden chuckled. “Remind me not to linger here. Last I looked, I was southron myself.”
“城门塔”看来还算完整，左右两边甚至还有几尺城墙。“醉鬼塔”陷在泽地边缘，位于过去南墙和西墙交会的地方，如今倾斜得厉害，有如一位准备吐出满肚子酒水的醉汉。相传，森林之子便是在高瘦尖细的“森林之子塔”顶召唤他们的无名诸神，送出巨浪的惩罚，如今塔尖少了一半，看上去像是有只大怪兽咬了一口塔楼雉堞，随后又把它吐进沼泽。三座塔楼均爬满青苔，有棵树从城门塔北面石墙缝隙间长出，盘根错节，表面覆盖着幽灵般苍白的坏死树皮。
Standards had been raised atop all three towers. The Karstark sunburst hung from the Drunkard’s Tower, beneath the direwolf; on the Children’s Tower it was the Greatjon’s giant in shattered chains. But on the Gatehouse Tower, the Stark banner flew alone. That was where Robb had made his seat. Catelyn made for it, with Ser Brynden and Ser Wendel behind her, their horses stepping slowly down the log-and-plank road that had been laid across the green-and-black fields of mud.
“诸神慈悲，”看到眼前的景象，布林登爵士不禁吃了一惊，“这就是卡林湾？这不过是个——”
She found her son surrounded by his father’s lords bannermen, in a drafty hall with a peat fire smoking in a black hearth. He was seated at a massive stone table, a pile of maps and papers in front of him, talking intently with Roose Bolton and the Greatjon. At first he did not notice her … but his wolf did. The great grey beast was lying near the fire, but when Catelyn entered he lifted his head, and his golden eyes met hers. The lords fell silent one by one, and Robb looked up at the sudden quiet and saw her. “Mother!” he said, his voice thick with emotion.
“——死亡陷阱。”凯特琳接口道：“叔叔，我知道这里看起来很不起眼，我初次见到时也这么想，但奈德向我保证，这片‘废墟’远比看起来要易守难攻。残存的三塔从三个方面控制堤道，任何北上的敌人都必须从他们中间通过，因为沼泽充满流沙和陷坑，毒蛇肆虐其间，无法穿越。而若要攻打其中一塔，军队必须涉过深至腰部的黑色泥泞，跨越蜥狮出没的护城河，再登上长满青苔、滑溜异常的城墙，同时从头到尾都暴露在另外两塔弓箭手的箭雨之下。”她故作严峻地朝叔叔一笑，“入夜之后，据说这里闹鬼，有很多充满恨意的北方幽魂等着吸南方人的鲜血。”
Catelyn wanted to run to him, to kiss his sweet brow, to wrap him in her arms and hold him so tightly that he would never come to harm … but here in front of his lords, she dared not. He was playing a man’s part now, and she would not take that away from him. So she held herself at the far end of the basalt slab they were using for a table. The direwolf got to his feet and padded across the room to where she stood. It seemed bigger than a wolf ought to be. “You’ve grown a beard,” she said to Robb, while Grey Wind sniffed her hand.
布林登爵士笑道：“记得提醒我别在此逗留太久。我上次照镜子时，看到自己还是个南方人哪。”
He rubbed his stubbled jaw, suddenly awkward. “Yes.” His chin hairs were redder than the ones on his head.
三座塔顶均竖起了旗帜。醉鬼塔上的是卡史塔克家族的日芒旗，飘扬于冰原狼旗帜下；森林之子塔上则是大琼恩的碎链巨人；但城门塔顶仅有史塔克家族的旗帜，罗柏当是选该处作为指挥部。于是凯特琳朝那里走去，布林登爵士和文德尔爵士跟在后面，他们的坐骑缓缓走过铺于黑绿泥泞上的木板桥。
“I like it.” Catelyn stroked the wolf’s head, gently. “It makes you look like my brother Edmure.” Grey Wind nipped at her fingers, playful, and trotted back to his place by the fire.
她在一个通风的大厅找到儿子。此时，他的身边围绕着父亲的封臣，黑火炉里烧着燃煤，他坐在一张巨大的石桌前，面前堆满地图和各式纸张，正聚精会神地与卢斯·波顿和大琼恩讨论战略。他起初没注意到她……是他的狼先发现了。那头大灰狼原本趴在火炉边，凯特琳刚进门，它便抬起头，金色的眸子与她四目相交。诸侯们纷纷安静下来，罗柏察觉到突来的静默，也抬起头。“母亲？”他的声音充满感情。
Ser Helman Tallhart was the first to follow the direwolf across the room to pay his respects, kneeling before her and pressing his brow to her hand. “Lady Catelyn,” he said, “you are fair as ever, a welcome sight in troubled times.” The Glovers followed, Galbart and Robett, and Greatjon Umber, and the rest, one by one. Theon Greyjoy was the last. “I had not looked to see you here, my lady,” he said as he knelt.
凯特琳好想飞奔过去，亲吻他甜美的双眉，将他紧紧搂住，再不让他受任何伤害……然而在众多诸侯面前，她不敢这么做。眼下他扮演的是男人的角色，她说什么也不能剥夺他的权力。于是她让自己站在人们权作长桌的玄武岩石板末端。冰原狼起身，轻步穿过大厅，走到她身边。她没见过这么大的狼。“你留了胡子。”她对罗柏说，灰风则嗅嗅她的手。
“I had not thought to be here,” Catelyn said, “until I came ashore at White Harbor, and Lord Wyman told me that Robb had called the banners. You know his son, Ser Wendel,” Wendel Manderly stepped forward and bowed as low as his girth would allow. “And my uncle, Ser Brynden Tully, who has left my sister’s service for mine.”
他摸摸长满胡茬的下巴，好像突然觉得不太习惯。“是啊。”他的胡须比头发更红。
“The Blackfish,” Robb said. “Thank you for joining us, ser. We need men of your courage. And you, Ser Wendel, I am glad to have you here. Is Ser Rodrik with you as well, Mother? I’ve missed him.”
“我挺喜欢你这样子，”凯特琳温柔地摸摸狼头，“你看起来很像我弟弟艾德慕。”灰风玩闹似地咬咬她的手指，然后快步跑回火边。
“Ser Rodrik is on his way north from White Harbor. I have named him castellan and commanded him to hold Winterfell till our return. Maester Luwin is a wise counsellor, but unskilled in the arts of war.”
赫曼·陶哈爵士率先追随冰原狼穿过房间向她致意，他在她面前单膝跪下，将额头按上她的手。“凯特琳夫人，”他说，“您依旧如此美丽，在当今的动乱时刻，见到您真是令人宽心。”葛洛佛家的盖伯特和罗贝特、大琼恩以及其他封臣也陆续上前致意。席恩·葛雷乔伊是最后一个。“夫人，没想到会在这里见到您。”说着他单膝跪下。
“Have no fear on that count, Lady Stark,” the Greatjon told her in his bass rumble. “Winterfell is safe. We’ll shove our swords up Tywin Lannister’s bunghole soon enough, begging your pardons, and then it’s on to the Red Keep to free Ned.”
“我也没想到会来这里，”凯特琳道，“我在白港登岸后，威曼大人告诉我罗柏业已召集封臣，我才临时改变了主意。你们应该都认识他的儿子，文德尔爵士。”文德尔·曼德勒走上前来，极尽腰带所能容许的程度，向众人弯腰行礼。“这是我叔叔布林登爵士，他离开了我妹妹，前来协助我方。”
“My lady, a question, as it please you.” Roose Bolton, Lord of the Dreadfort, had a small voice, yet when he spoke larger men quieted to listen. His eyes were curiously pale, almost without color, and his look disturbing. “It is said that you hold Lord Tywin’s dwarf son as captive. Have you brought him to us? I vow, we should make good use of such a hostage.”
“黑鱼大人，”罗柏说，“感谢您加入我们，我们正需要像您这般勇武的人。文德尔爵士，我也很高兴得到您的协助。母亲，罗德利克爵士可有同你一道归来？我很想念他。”
“I did hold Tyrion Lannister, but no longer,” Catelyn was forced to admit. A chorus of consternation greeted the news. “I was no more pleased than you, my lords. The gods saw fit to free him, with some help from my fool of a sister.” She ought not to be so open in her contempt, she knew, but her parting from the Eyrie had not been pleasant. She had offered to take Lord Robert with her, to foster him at Winterfell for a few years. The company of other boys would do him good, she had dared to suggest. Lysa’s rage had been frightening to behold. “Sister or no,” she had replied, “if you try to steal my son, you will leave by the Moon Door.” After that there was no more to be said.
“罗德利克爵士自白港往北去了，我己任命他为代理城主，令他守护临冬城，直到我们返回。鲁温学士虽然学识渊博，毕竟不擅战争之事。”
The lords were anxious to question her further, but Catelyn raised a hand. “No doubt we will have time for all this later, but my journey has fatigued me. I would speak with my son alone. I know you will forgive me, my lords.” She gave them no choice; led by the ever-obliging Lord Hornwood, the bannermen bowed and took their leave. “And you, Theon,” she added when Greyjoy lingered. He smiled and left them.
“史塔克夫人，您毋需担心，”大琼恩声如洪钟地告诉她，“临冬城不会有事。而咱们过不了多久就会拿剑捅进兰尼斯特的屁眼，唉，说话粗鲁还请见谅，然后呢，咱们就一路杀进红堡，把奈德给救出来。”
There was ale and cheese on the table. Catelyn filled a horn, sat, sipped, and studied her son. He seemed taller than when she’d left, and the wisps of beard did make him look older. “Edmure was sixteen when he grew his first whiskers.”
“夫人，如您不见怪，我有个问题想请教。”恐怖堡领主卢斯·波顿的声音极其细小，然而当他开口讲话时，再高大的人都会安静倾听。他的眼瞳颜色淡得出奇，几乎无从描绘，而他的眼神更是令人烦乱。“听说您逮捕了泰温大人的侏儒儿子，不知您是否把他也带来了？我对天发誓，我们会好好利用这个人质。”
“I will be sixteen soon enough,” Robb said.
“我的确逮捕了提利昂·兰尼斯特，只可惜他现下已不在我手上了。”凯特琳不得不承认。此话一出，四周立即响起阵阵错愕之声。“诸位大人，我也不希望此事发生，然而天上诸神有意放他自由，更加上我那妹妹愚行所致。”她自知不应如此明显地流露对妹妹的轻蔑，但鹰巢城一别实在很不愉快。她原本提议带小劳勃公爵同行，让他在临冬城住上一段时日，她更大胆表示，与其他几个男孩作伴，应该对他很有好处。然而莱沙的怒意简直让人看了都害怕。“我管你是不是我姐姐，”她回答，“你敢偷我儿子，就给我从月门出去！”在那之后，什么都不用说了。
“And you are fifteen now. Fifteen, and leading a host to battle. Can you understand why I might fear, Robb?”
北境诸侯急于进一步探询相关消息，但凯特琳举起一只手。“我们稍后一定有时间谈，眼下我长途跋涉，颇感疲惫，只想单独和我儿子讲几句。相信诸位大人必会谅解。”她让他们别无选择，于是在向来遵从命令的霍伍德伯爵率领下，封臣们纷纷鞠躬离开。“席恩，你也是。”看到葛雷乔伊留了下来，她又补上这句。他微笑着走开。
His look grew stubborn. “There was no one else.”
桌上有麦酒和乳酪，凯特琳倒了一角杯，坐下来，小啜一口之后，细细端详儿子。他似乎比她离开时长得高了些，那点胡子也确让他看起来年纪大了不少。“艾德慕是从十六岁开始留胡子的。”
“No one?” she said. “Pray, who were those men I saw here a moment ago? Roose Bolton, Rickard Karstark, Galbart and Robett Glover, the Greatjon, Helman Tallhart … you might have given the command to any of them. Gods be good, you might even have sent Theon, though he would not be my choice.”
“我很快就满十六岁了。”罗柏说。
“They are not Starks,” he said.
“但你现在是十五岁，才十五岁，就带领大军投入战场。罗柏，你能理解我的担忧吗？”
“They are men , Robb, seasoned in battle. You were fighting with wooden swords less than a year past.”
他的眼神倔强起来。“除了我没别人了。”
She saw anger in his eyes at that, but it was gone as quick as it came, and suddenly he was a boy again. “I know,” he said, abashed. “Are you … are you sending me back to Winterfell?”
“没别人？”她说，“你倒是说说，我几分钟前见到的那些人是谁？卢斯·波顿、瑞卡德·卡史塔克、盖伯特·葛洛佛与罗贝特·葛洛佛，还有大琼恩、赫曼·陶哈……你大可把指挥权交给他们中的任何一人。诸神有眼，你就算派席恩都成，虽说我不会选他。”
Catelyn sighed. “I should. You ought never have left. Yet I dare not, not now. You have come too far. Someday these lords will look to you as their liege. If I pack you off now, like a child being sent to bed without his supper, they will remember, and laugh about it in their cups. The day will come when you need them to respect you, even fear you a little. Laughter is poison to fear. I will not do that to you, much as I might wish to keep you safe.”
“他们不是史塔克。”他说。
“You have my thanks, Mother,” he said, his relief obvious beneath the formality.
“他们是成年人，罗柏，他们经验丰富。而不到一年前，你还拿着木剑在练习呢。”
She reached across his table and touched his hair. “You are my firstborn, Robb. I have only to look at you to remember the day you came into the world, red-faced and squalling.”
听到这句话，她看到他眼里闪现怒意，但那火光稍现即逝，转眼间他又变回了大男孩。“我知道，”他困窘地说，“那你……你要把我送回临冬城去吗？”
He rose, clearly uncomfortable with her touch, and walked to the hearth. Grey Wind rubbed his head against his leg. “You know … about Father?”
凯特琳叹口气，“我应该要送你回去的，你原本就不该动身。可现在我不敢这么做，你已经走到了这一步，有朝一日，你会成为这些诸侯的封君，倘若我现在就这么把你给送回去，像把小孩子赶上床。不给他吃晚饭一样，他们便会牢牢记住，并在背后取笑。将来你会需要他们的尊敬，甚至他们的畏惧，而嘲笑是惧怕的毒药，我不会对你这么做，虽然我一心只想保你平安。”
“Yes.” The reports of Robert’s sudden death and Ned’s fall had frightened Catelyn more than she could say, but she would not let her son see her fear. “Lord Manderly told me when I landed at White Harbor. Have you had any word of your sisters?”
“母亲，谢谢你。”他说。脸上那层礼貌下的如释重负之情清晰可见。
“There was a letter,” Robb said, scratching his direwolf under the jaw. “One for you as well, but it came to Winterfell with mine.” He went to the table, rummaged among some maps and papers, and returned with a crumpled parchment. “This is the one she wrote me, I never thought to bring yours.”
她把手伸到桌子对面摸摸他的头发。“罗柏，你是我第一个孩子，我只要看着你，就能想起你红着脸呱呱坠地的那一天。”
Something in Robb’s tone troubled her. She smoothed out the paper and read. Concern gave way to disbelief, then to anger, and lastly to fear. “This is Cersei’s letter, not your sister’s,” she said when she was done. “The real message is in what Sansa does not say. All this about how kindly and gently the Lannisters are treating her … I know the sound of a threat, even whispered. They have Sansa hostage, and they mean to keep her.”
他站起来，显然对于她的碰触感到有些不自在。他走到火炉边，灰风伸头摩擦着他的脚。“你知道……父亲的事吗？”
“There’s no mention of Arya,” Robb pointed out, miserable.
“知道。”劳勃猝死和奈德入狱的消息比任何事都更教凯特琳害怕，但她不能让儿子发现自己的恐惧。“我在白港上岸时，曼德勒大人跟我说了。你有你妹妹们的消息吗？”
“No.” Catelyn did not want to think what that might mean, not now, not here.
“我收到一封信，”罗柏边说边搔冰原狼的下巴。“还有一封是给你的，但和我那封一起寄到了临冬城。”他走到桌边，在地图和纸张间翻找了一会儿，拿出一张摺皱的羊皮纸走回来。“这是她写给我的，我没想到把你的那封也带来。”
“I had hoped … if you still held the Imp, a trade of hostages …” He took Sansa’s letter and crumpled it in his fist, and she could tell from the way he did it that it was not the first time. “Is there word from the Eyrie? I wrote to Aunt Lysa, asking help. Has she called Lord Arryn’s banners, do you know? Will the knights of the Vale come join us?”
罗柏的语气令她有些不安。她摊平纸张读了起来，然而关切随即转为怀疑，接着变成愤怒，最后成了忧惧。“这是瑟曦写的信，不是你妹妹写的。”看完之后她说，“这封信真正的意思，正是珊莎没写出来的部分。什么兰尼斯特家对她多么照顾优待……其实是威胁的口气。他们扣住了珊莎，当成人质和筹码。”
“Only one,” she said, “the best of them, my uncle … but Brynden Blackfish was a Tully first. My sister is not about to stir beyond her Bloody Gate.”
“上面也没提到艾莉亚。”罗柏难过地指出。
Robb took it hard. “Mother, what are we going to do? I brought this whole army together, eighteen thousand men, but I don’t … I’m not certain …” He looked to her, his eyes shining, the proud young lord melted away in an instant, and quick as that he was a child again, a fifteen-year-old boy looking to his mother for answers.
“的确没有。”凯特琳不愿去想这代表着什么意思，尤其在此时此地。
It would not do.
“我本来希望……如果小恶魔还在你手上，我们就可以交换人质……”他拿过珊莎的信，把它揉得稀烂，她看得出这不是他第一次揉了。“鹰巢城那边有消息吗？我已经写信给莱沙阿姨，请她援助。她是否召集了艾林大人的封臣？峡谷骑士会加入我们吗？”
“What are you so afraid of, Robb?” she asked gently.
“只有一个会来，”她说，“最优秀的一个，那就是我叔叔……然而黑鱼布林登毕竟是徒利家的人。我妹妹不打算派兵到血门之外。”
“I …” He turned his head away, to hide the first tear. “If we march … even if we win … the Lannisters hold Sansa, and Father. They’ll kill them, won’t they?”
罗柏深受打击。“母亲，那我们该怎么办？我召集了这支一万八千人的大军，可我不……我不确定……”他看着她，眼里闪着泪光，方才那个年轻气盛的领主转瞬间消失得无影无踪，他又变回了十五岁的大男孩，希望母亲能提供解答。
“They want us to think so.”
这样是不行的。
“You mean they’re lying?”
“罗柏，你在怕什么？”她温柔地问。
“I do not know, Robb. What I do know is that you have no choice. If you go to King’s Landing and swear fealty, you will never be allowed to leave. If you turn your tail and retreat to Winterfell, your lords will lose all respect for you. Some may even go over to the Lannisters. Then the queen, with that much less to fear, can do as she likes with her prisoners. Our best hope, our only true hope, is that you can defeat the foe in the field. If you should chance to take Lord Tywin or the Kingslayer captive, why then a trade might very well be possible, but that is not the heart of it. So long as you have power enough that they must fear you, Ned and your sister should be safe. Cersei is wise enough to know that she may need them to make her peace, should the fighting go against her.”
“我……”他转过头，借以掩饰流下的泪水。“如果我们进兵……就算我们赢了……珊莎还在兰尼斯特手上，父亲也是，他们会被杀的，对不对？”
“What if the fighting doesn’t go against her?” Robb asked. “What if it goes against us?”
“他们正希望我们这么想。”
Catelyn took his hand. “Robb, I will not soften the truth for you. If you lose, there is no hope for any of us. They say there is naught but stone at the heart of Casterly Rock. Remember the fate of Rhaegar’s children.”
“你的意思是他们说谎？”
She saw the fear in his young eyes then, but there was a strength as well. “Then I will not lose,” he vowed.
“我不知道，罗柏，我只知道你别无选择。假如你到君临宣誓效忠，便永远也不可能脱身。若是你夹着尾巴逃回临冬城，那封臣们对你原有的尊敬更将荡然无存，有些人甚至会倒戈投靠兰尼斯特。届时王后便无后顾之忧，可以随意处置手上人犯。我们最大的希望，或者说惟一的希望，便是你能在战场上击败对手。假如你能活捉泰温大人或弑君者，那么交换人质便会非常可行。其实交换人质亦非重点所在，最重要的是，只要你的实力令他们不敢小觑，奈德和你妹妹就会平安无事。瑟曦不笨，知道若是战事对她不利，她可能会需要他们来换取和平。”
“Tell me what you know of the fighting in the riverlands,” she said. She had to learn if he was truly ready.
“若是战争并非对她不利，”罗柏问，“而是对我们不利呢？”
“Less than a fortnight past, they fought a battle in the hills below the Golden Tooth,” Robb said. “Uncle Edmure had sent Lord Vance and Lord Piper to hold the pass, but the Kingslayer descended on them and put them to flight. Lord Vance was slain. The last word we had was that Lord Piper was falling back to join your brother and his other bannermen at Riverrun, with Jaime Lannister on his heels. That’s not the worst of it, though. All the time they were battling in the pass, Lord Tywin was bringing a second Lannister army around from the south. It’s said to be even larger than Jaime’s host.
凯特琳握住他的手。“罗柏，我不打算隐瞒事实，假如你战败，那我们就一点希望都没有了。据说凯岩城的人都是铁石心肠，你要牢牢记住雷加的孩子是什么下场。”
“Father must have known that, because he sent out some men to oppose them, under the king’s own banner. He gave the command to some southron lordling, Lord Erik or Derik or something like that, but Ser Raymun Darry rode with him, and the letter said there were other knights as well, and a force of Father’s own guardsmen. Only it was a trap. Lord Derik had no sooner crossed the Red Fork than the Lannisters fell upon him, the king’s banner be damned, and Gregor Clegane took them in the rear as they tried to pull back across the Mummer’s Ford. This Lord Derik and a few others may have escaped, no one is certain, but Ser Raymun was killed, and most of our men from Winterfell. Lord Tywin has closed off the kingsroad, it’s said, and now he’s marching north toward Harrenhal, burning as he goes.”
她在他年轻的眼睛里见到了恐惧，却也看到了力量。“那么，我一定不能输。”
Grim and grimmer , thought Catelyn. It was worse than she’d imagined. “You mean to meet him here?” she asked.
“把你所知的河间战事告诉我。”她说。她要知道他是否已准备就绪。
“If he comes so far, but no one thinks he will,” Robb said. “I’ve sent word to Howland Reed, Father’s old friend at Greywater Watch. If the Lannisters come up the Neck, the crannogmen will bleed them every step of the way, but Galbart Glover says Lord Tywin is too smart for that, and Roose Bolton agrees. He’ll stay close to the Trident, they believe, taking the castles of the river lords one by one, until Riverrun stands alone. We need to march south to meet him.”
“不到两周前，在金牙城下的丘陵地有一场激战。”罗柏道，“艾德慕舅舅命凡斯大人和派柏大人防守隘口，但弑君者率兵下山猛攻，把他们打得落花流水，凡斯大人以身殉职。根据我们最新得到的消息，派柏大人正向奔流城撤军，以便和舅舅以及他的其他封臣会合，詹姆·兰尼斯特穷追不舍。但这还不是最糟的情报，他们在山口交战的同时，泰温大人正带着另一支军队从南方迂回进逼，据说规模比詹姆的部队大得多。”
The very idea of it chilled Catelyn to the bone. What chance would a fifteen-year-old boy have against seasoned battle commanders like Jaime and Tywin Lannister? “Is that wise? You are strongly placed here. It’s said that the old Kings in the North could stand at Moat Cailin and throw back hosts ten times the size of their own.”
“父亲一定也知道这件事，所以他派人打着国王的旗帜前去阻止。领头的好像是个南方少爷，叫艾里还是德里大人来着，雷蒙·戴瑞爵士也跟着去了，信上说还有其他的骑士，以及一队父亲自己的卫士。然而这却是个陷阱，德里爵士刚渡过红叉河，立刻遭到兰尼斯特军猛烈攻击，国王的旗帜毫无效力，被人随意践踏。后来他们想撤过戏子滩，格雷果·克里冈又从后方突袭。我们不确定德里大人和其他少数人是否逃脱，但雷蒙爵士和我们临冬城的多数卫士都战死了。传说泰温大人的军队已接近国王大道，正往北朝赫伦堡而来，沿途烧杀抢劫。”
“Yes, but our food and supplies are running low, and this is not land we can live off easily. We’ve been waiting for Lord Manderly, but now that his sons have joined us, we need to march.”
消息一个比一个更悲惨，凯特琳心想。情况比她想像中还糟。“你打算在这里等他么？”
She was hearing the lords bannermen speaking with her son’s voice, she realized. Over the years, she had hosted many of them at Winterfell, and been welcomed with Ned to their own hearths and tables. She knew what sorts of men they were, each one. She wondered if Robb did.
“除非他真打算北上来此，但我们都认为他不会。”罗柏道，“我已经派人送信给父亲在灰水望的老朋友霍兰·黎德，假如兰尼斯特军企图穿越沼泽，泽地人会让他们举步维艰、损失惨重。盖柏特·葛洛佛认为以泰温大人的精明，他不会这么做，卢斯·波顿也表示同意。他们相信他会在三河流域一带活动，将河间诸侯的城堡一个一个逐步攻陷，直到最后奔流城孤立无援。所以我们必须南下去会他。”
And yet there was sense in what they said. This host her son had assembled was not a standing army such as the Free Cities were accustomed to maintain, nor a force of guardsmen paid in coin. Most of them were smallfolk: crofters, fieldhands, fishermen, sheepherders, the sons of innkeeps and traders and tanners, leavened with a smattering of sellswords and freeriders hungry for plunder. When their lords called, they came … but not forever. “Marching is all very well,” she said to her son, “but where , and to what purpose? What do you mean to do?”
光这念头便令凯特琳毛骨悚然。单凭他一个十五岁的男孩，怎么可能与詹姆或泰温·兰尼斯特那样经验丰富的沙场老手抗衡？“这样好吗？此地易守难攻，传说古代的北境之王只需守住卡林湾，便可击退十倍于己的敌军。”
Robb hesitated. “The Greatjon thinks we should take the battle to Lord Tywin and surprise him,” he said, “but the Glovers and the Karstarks feel we’d be wiser to go around his army and join up with Uncle Ser Edmure against the Kingslayer.” He ran his fingers through his shaggy mane of auburn hair, looking unhappy. “Though by the time we reach Riverrun … I’m not certain …”
“没错，话是这样说，但我们的粮食补给日渐短缺，待在这里自给自足已不容易。我们原本是在等曼德勒大人，眼下他的儿子既然到了，我们便得动身。”
“Be certain,” Catelyn told her son, “or go home and take up that wooden sword again. You cannot afford to seem indecisive in front of men like Roose Bolton and Rickard Karstark. Make no mistake, Robb—these are your bannermen, not your friends. You named yourself battle commander. Command.”
她突然明白，她听到的是诸侯们透过她儿子的声音在说话。这些年来，她在临冬城多次宴请北方诸侯，也曾与奈德到他们家中作客，她很明白他们是什么样的人，每一家她都摸透了底细，却纳闷罗柏知不知道。
Her son looked at her, startled, as if he could not credit what he was hearing. “As you say, Mother.”
然而他们顾虑的却也有理。她儿子所集结的这支军队既非自由贸易城邦的常备军，亦非领薪水吃饭的守卫队，他们多数是平民百姓：佃农、庄稼汉、渔夫、牧羊人、旅店老板的儿子、生意人和皮革匠，外加少数渴望掠夺的雇佣骑士、自由骑手和流浪武士。当他们的领主发出召集令，他们便前来效命……然而并非永远。“进军当然很好，”她对儿子说，“但要前往何处，有何目的？你有什么打算？”
“I’ll ask you again. What do you mean to do?”
罗柏迟疑片刻，“大琼恩认为我们应该出其不意突袭泰温大人，”他说，“然而葛洛佛家和卡史塔克家的人都觉得避其锋芒，赶紧与艾德慕舅舅合力对付弑君者才是明智之举。”他伸手拨拨蓬乱的枣红头发，看来有些闷闷不乐。“可等我们抵达奔流城……我不确定……”
Robb drew a map across the table, a ragged piece of old leather covered with lines of faded paint. One end curled up from being rolled; he weighed it down with his dagger. “Both plans have virtues, but … look, if we try to swing around Lord Tywin’s host, we take the risk of being caught between him and the Kingslayer, and if we attack him … by all reports, he has more men than I do, and a lot more armored horse. The Greatjon says that won’t matter if we catch him with his breeches down, but it seems to me that a man who has fought as many battles as Tywin Lannister won’t be so easily surprised.”
“你非确定不可，”凯特琳对儿子说，“不然就回家继续拿木剑练习罢。在卢斯·波顿或瑞卡德·卡史塔克这种人面前，你绝不能犹豫不决。罗柏，你别搞错了，他们是你的封臣，不是你的朋友。你既自任为总指挥，就得发号施令。”
“Good,” she said. She could hear echoes of Ned in his voice, as he sat there, puzzling over the map. “Tell me more.”
儿子看着她，显得有些吃惊，仿佛不能完全相信刚才听到的话。“母亲，您说的对。”
“I’d leave a small force here to hold Moat Cailin, archers mostly, and march the rest down the causeway,” he said, “but once we’re below the Neck, I’d split our host in two. The foot can continue down the kingsroad, while our horsemen cross the Green Fork at the Twins.” He pointed. “When Lord Tywin gets word that we’ve come south, he’ll march north to engage our main host, leaving our riders free to hurry down the west bank to Riverrun.” Robb sat back, not quite daring to smile, but pleased with himself and hungry for her praise.
“我再问你一次：你有什么打算？”
Catelyn frowned down at the map. “You’d put a river between the two parts of your army.”
罗柏抽出一张绘满褪色线条的老旧皮质地图，摊平在桌，其中一角因为长期卷动而翘了起来，他用匕首固定住。“两个计划备有优点，可是……你看，假如我们试图绕开泰温大人主力，就得冒被他和弑君者两面夹击的风险，如果我们与他正面交战……根据各种情报显示，他不但总兵力比我多，骑兵的数量更是远远超过我们。虽然大琼恩说只要趁对方脱下裤子的时候攻其不备，人再多都不怕，可在我看来，像泰温·兰尼斯特这样身经百战的人，恐怕不容易被逮到啊。”
“And between Jaime and Lord Tywin,” he said eagerly. The smile came at last. “There’s no crossing on the Green Fork above the ruby ford, where Robert won his crown. Not until the Twins, all the way up here, and Lord Frey controls that bridge. He’s your father’s bannerman, isn’t that so?”
“很好。”她说。看他坐在那里，为地图伤脑筋，从他的话中，她可以听见奈德的声音。“继续说。”
The Late Lord Frey , Catelyn thought. “He is,” she admitted, “but my father has never trusted him. Nor should you.”
“我打算分配少量兵力留下来防守卡林湾，以弓箭手为核心，然后全军沿堤道南下。”他说，“渡过颈泽之后，我将兵分两路，步兵继续走国王大道，骑兵则从孪河城渡过绿叉河。”他指给她看。“泰温大人一旦得知我军南下的消息，当会率军北进与我们主力交战，届时我们的骑兵便可无后顾之忧地从河流西岸赶往奔流城。”说完罗柏坐下来，不太敢露出微笑，但看得出他对自己的表现颇感满意，渴望听到她的称许。
“I won’t,” Robb promised. “What do you think?”
凯特琳皱紧眉，低头看着地图。“你让一条河挡在自己的军队之间。”
She was impressed despite herself. He looks like a Tully , she thought, yet he’s still his father’s son, and Ned taught him well . “Which force would you command?”
“却也挡在詹姆和泰温大人之间！”他急切地说，终于绽开微笑。“绿叉河在红宝石滩以北就没有渡口，劳勃就是在那里赢得了王冠。惟一的渡口是在孪河城，距离很远，更何况桥还掌控在佛雷大人手中。他是外公的封臣，对不对？”
“The horse,” he answered at once. Again like his father; Ned would always take the more dangerous task himself.
迟到的佛雷侯爵，凯特琳心想。“他的确是，”她承认，“但你外公从来不信任他，你也不应该轻信他。”
“And the other?”
“我不会的。”罗柏向她保证。“你觉得这计划如何？”
“The Greatjon is always saying that we should smash Lord Tywin. I thought I’d give him the honor.”
虽然担心，她依旧不得不同意这是个出色的计划。他长得虽像徒利，她心想，心底却是他父亲的儿子，奈德把他教导得很好。“你要指挥哪一队？”
It was his first misstep, but how to make him see it without wounding his fledgling confidence? “Your father once told me that the Greatjon was as fearless as any man he had ever known.”
“骑兵队。”他立刻答道。这也像他父亲：危险的任务，奈德永远自己扛。
Robb grinned. “Grey Wind ate two of his fingers, and he laughed about it. So you agree, then?”
“另一队呢？”
“Your father is not fearless,” Catelyn pointed out. “He is brave, but that is very different.”
“大琼恩老说我们应该迎头痛宰泰温大人，我想给他这个荣誉，让他实现愿望。”
Her son considered that for a moment. “The eastern host will be all that stands between Lord Tywin and Winterfell,” he said thoughtfully. “Well, them and whatever few bowmen I leave here at the Moat. So I don’t want someone fearless, do I?”
这是他犯的第一个错误，但要如何让他明白，而不伤害到他仅见雏形的自尊呢？“你父亲曾经对我说，大琼恩是他平生所见最勇猛无畏的人。”
“No. You want cold cunning, I should think, not courage.”
罗柏嘻嘻笑道：“灰风咬掉他两根手指头，他却哈哈大笑。这么说来你同意啰？”
“Roose Bolton,” Robb said at once. “That man scares me.”
“你父亲并非无畏，”凯特琳指出：“而是勇敢，这是完全不一样的。”
“Then let us pray he will scare Tywin Lannister as well.”
儿子仔细考虑了半晌。“东路军将是惟一能阻挡泰温大人前往临冬城的屏障。”他若有所思地说，“嗯，就只有他们，以及我留在卡林湾的少量弓箭手。所以我不应该让无畏的人来率领，对不对？”
Robb nodded and rolled up the map. “I’ll give the commands, and assemble an escort to take you home to Winterfell.”
“没错。我认为你要的应该是冷静的头脑，而非匹夫之勇。”
Catelyn had fought to keep herself strong, for Ned’s sake and for this stubborn brave son of theirs. She had put despair and fear aside, as if they were garments she did not choose to wear … but now she saw that she had donned them after all.
“那就是卢斯·波顿了。”罗柏马上说，“我很怕那个人。”
“I am not going to Winterfell,” she heard herself say, surprised at the sudden rush of tears that blurred her vision. “My father may be dying behind the walls of Riverrun. My brother is surrounded by foes. I must go to them.”
“就让我们祈祷泰温·兰尼斯特也怕他吧。”
*TYRION
罗柏点点头，卷起地图。“就这样办，我会派一队人马护送你回临冬城。”
C hella daughter of Cheyk of the Black Ears had gone ahead to scout, and it was she who brought back word of the army at the crossroads. “By their fires I call them twenty thousand strong,” she said. “Their banners are red, with a golden lion.”
这些日子以来，凯特琳极力使自己坚强。为了奈德，也为了他俩这个勇敢而倔强的儿子，她抛开了绝望和恐惧，仿佛那是她所不愿穿的衣服……然而现在她发现自己终究还是穿着。
“Your father?” Bronn asked.
“我不回临冬城，”她听见自己这么说，同时惊讶地发现，骤然涌出的泪水，已然模糊了她的视线。“你外公正奄奄一息地躺在奔流城里，你舅舅也被敌人团团包围。”
“Or my brother Jaime,” Tyrion said. “We shall know soon enough.” He surveyed his ragged band of brigands: near three hundred Stone Crows, Moon Brothers, Black Ears, and Burned Men, and those just the seed of the army he hoped to grow. Gunthor son of Gurn was raising the other clans even now. He wondered what his lord father would make of them in their skins and bits of stolen steel. If truth be told, he did not know what to make of them himself. Was he their commander or their captive? Most of the time, it seemed to be a little of both. “It might be best if I rode down alone,” he suggested.
第五十七章 提利昂
“Best for Tyrion son of Tywin,” said Ulf, who spoke for the Moon Brothers.
黑耳部的齐克之女齐拉当先去侦察，带回岔路口有支军队的消息。“从他们的营火计算，应该有两万个，”她说，“红旗子，上面一只金狮子。”
Shagga glowered, a fearsome sight to see. “Shagga son of Dolf likes this not. Shagga will go with the boyman, and if the boyman lies, Shagga will chop off his manhood—”
“是你父亲？”波隆问。
“—and feed it to the goats, yes,” Tyrion said wearily. “Shagga, I give you my word as a Lannister, I will return.”
“要不就是我老哥詹姆。”提利昂说，“我们很快就会知道了。”他检视着自己这支衣着破烂的土匪队伍：三百名来自石鸦部、月人部、黑耳部和灼人部的原住民，这只是他着手组建的军队的种子。而冈恩之子冈梭尔此刻正在召集其他部落。他不知父亲看了这些身穿兽皮、手持偷来的破铜烂铁的人会怎么说，事实上，他自己看了都不知道该说什么才好。他究竟是他们的首领还是俘虏？恐怕是两者皆有罢。“我最好自个儿下去。”他提议。
“Why should we trust your word?” Chella was a small hard woman, flat as a boy, and no fool. “Lowland lords have lied to the clans before.”
“对泰温之子提利昂来说最好。”月人部的首领乌尔夫说。
“You wound me, Chella,” Tyrion said. “Here I thought we had become such friends. But as you will. You shall ride with me, and Shagga and Conn for the Stone Crows, Ulf for the Moon Brothers, and Timett son of Timett for the Burned Men.” The clansmen exchanged wary looks as he named them. “The rest shall wait here until I send for you. Try not to kill and maim each other while I’m gone.”
夏嘎睁大眼睛瞪着他，露出骇人的神情。“多夫之子夏嘎不喜欢。夏嘎要和小男人一起去，如果小男人说谎，夏嘎就会剁掉他的命根子——”
He put his heels to his horse and trotted off, giving them no choice but to follow or be left behind. Either was fine with him, so long as they did not sit down to talk for a day and a night. That was the trouble with the clans; they had an absurd notion that every man’s voice should be heard in council, so they argued about everything , endlessly. Even their women were allowed to speak. Small wonder that it had been hundreds of years since they last threatened the Vale with anything beyond an occasional raid. Tyrion meant to change that.
“——拿去喂山羊，我知道。”提利昂有气无力地说，“夏嘎，我以兰尼斯特家之名起誓，我会回来的。”
Bronn rode with him. Behind them—after a quick bit of grumbling—the five clansmen followed on their under-size garrons, scrawny things that looked like ponies and scrambled up rock walls like goats.
“我们为什么要相信你的话？”齐拉是个矮小强悍的女人，胸平坦得和男孩子一样，却一点也不笨。“平地人的酋长以前欺骗过山上部落。”
The Stone Crows rode together, and Chella and Ulf stayed close as well, as the Moon Brothers and Black Ears had strong bonds between them. Timett son of Timett rode alone. Every clan in the Mountains of the Moon feared the Burned Men, who mortified their flesh with fire to prove their courage and (the others said) roasted babies at their feasts. And even the other Burned Men feared Timett, who had put out his own left eye with a white-hot knife when he reached the age of manhood. Tyrion gathered that it was more customary for a boy to burn off a nipple, a finger, or (if he was truly brave, or truly mad) an ear. Timett’s fellow Burned Men were so awed by his choice of an eye that they promptly named him a red hand, which seemed to be some sort of a war chief.
“齐拉，你这样说真是太伤我的心了，”提利昂道，“我还以为我们已经成了好朋友呢。不过算啦，你就跟我一道去吧，夏嘎、康恩代表石鸦部，乌尔夫代表月人部，提魅之子提魅代表灼人部，你们几个也一起来。”被他点名的原住民满怀戒心地彼此看看。“其余的留在这里等我通知。我不在的时候，拜托千万不要自相残杀。”
“I wonder what their king burned off,” Tyrion said to Bronn when he heard the tale. Grinning, the sellsword had tugged at his crotch … but even Bronn kept a respectful tongue around Timett. If a man was mad enough to put out his own eye, he was unlikely to be gentle to his enemies.
他两腿一夹马肚，向前快跑，逼他们要么立刻跟上，要么被抛在后面。其实他们有没有跟上对他来说都没差，怕只怕他们坐下来“讨论”个三天三夜。这是原住民最麻烦的地方，他们有种古怪的观念，认为开会的时候每个人都有权表达意见，甚至连女人也有开口的权利，所以不论事情大小，他们一律争吵不休。难怪几百年来，除了偶尔实施小规模的突袭，他们无法真正威胁到艾林谷。提利昂有意改变这个局面。
Distant watchers peered down from towers of unmortared stone as the party descended through the foothills, and once Tyrion saw a raven take wing. Where the high road twisted between two rocky outcrops, they came to the first strong point. A low earthen wall four feet high closed off the road, and a dozen crossbowmen manned the heights. Tyrion halted his followers out of range and rode to the wall alone. “Who commands here?” he shouted up.
波隆和他并肩而行，身后——咕哝了几声以后——五个原住民骑着营养不良的矮种马跟了上来。每匹马都骨瘦如柴，看起来小得可怜，走在颠簸山路上活像是山羊。
The captain was quick to appear, and even quicker to give them an escort when he recognized his lord’s son. They trotted past blackened fields and burned holdfasts, down to the riverlands and the Green Fork of the Trident. Tyrion saw no bodies, but the air was full of ravens and carrion crows; there had been fighting here, and recently.
两个石鸦部的人走在一块，齐拉跟乌尔夫靠得很近，因为月人部和黑耳部之间的关系向来密切。提魅之子提魅则独自前行。明月山脉里的每一个部落都害怕灼人部，因为他们用火自虐来证明勇气，甚至在宴会上烧烤婴儿来吃（这是其他几部说的）。而提魅更令所有灼人部民害怕，因为他成年的时候用一把烧得白热的尖刀剜出了自己的左眼。提利昂大致听出，灼人部中一般男孩的成年礼多半是烧掉自己的一边乳头、一根手指或是（只有非常勇敢或非常疯狂的人才做得出）一只耳朵。提魅的灼人部同胞由于对他的挖眼行径大为折服，立刻便让他成为“红手”，约略等于战争领袖的意思。
Half a league from the crossroads, a barricade of sharpened stakes had been erected, manned by pikemen and archers. Behind the line, the camp spread out to the far distance. Thin fingers of smoke rose from hundreds of cookfires, mailed men sat under trees and honed their blades, and familiar banners fluttered from staffs thrust into the muddy ground.
“我真想知道他们的国王烧掉的是什么。”提利昂听这故事的时候，对波隆这么说。佣兵嘿嘿一笑，伸手指指他的胯下……不过就连波隆，在提魅身边讲话也特别小心。既然这人疯到连自己眼睛都敢挖出来，想必不会对敌人温柔。
A party of mounted horsemen rode forward to challenge them as they approached the stakes. The knight who led them wore silver armor inlaid with amethysts and a striped purple-and-silver cloak. His shield bore a unicorn sigil, and a spiral horn two feet long jutted up from the brow of his horsehead helm. Tyrion reined up to greet him. “Ser Flement.”
队伍骑马走下山麓小丘，远处，未砌水泥的石制嘹望塔上，守卫正向下扫视。一只渡鸦振翅高飞。山路夹在裸岩中间转弯，他们来到了第一个有重兵防守的关卡。道路为一堵四尺陶土矮墙所阻挡，高处站有十来个十字弓兵负责把守。提利昂要同伴们停在射程之外，策马独自走近。“这儿由谁负责？”
Ser Flement Brax lifted his visor. “Tyrion,” he said in astonishment. “My lord, we all feared you dead, or …” He looked at the clansmen uncertainly. “These … companions of yours …”
守卫队长很快出现，一认出他是领主的儿子，立刻派人马护送他们下山。他们快马跑过焦黑的田野和焚尽的村舍，进入河间地区，接近三叉戟河的支流绿叉河。提利昂虽没看见尸体，但空气中弥漫着专食腐尸的乌鸦发出的味道；显然这里最近曾发生战斗。
“Bosom friends and loyal retainers,” Tyrion said. “Where will I find my lord father?”
离十字路口半里格的地方，架起了一道削尖木桩排列的防御工事，由长矛兵和弓箭手负责防守。防线之后，营地绵延直至远方，炊烟如纤细的手指，自几百座营火中升起，全副武装的人坐在树下磨利武器，熟悉的旗帜飘扬风中，旗竿深深插进泥泞的地面。
“He has taken the inn at the crossroads for his quarters.”
他们走近木栅时，一群骑兵上前盘问。领头的骑士身穿镶紫水晶的银铠甲，肩披紫银条纹披风，盾牌上绘有独角兽纹饰，马形头盔前端有一根螺旋独角。提利昂勒马问候：“佛列蒙爵士。”
Tyrion laughed. The inn at the crossroads! Perhaps the gods were just after all. “I will see him at once.”
佛列蒙·布拉克斯爵士揭起面罩。“提利昂，”他惊讶地说，“大人，我们都以为您死了，不然也……”他有些犹豫地看着那群原住民。“您的这些……同伴……”
“As you say, my lord.” Ser Flement wheeled his horse about and shouted commands. Three rows of stakes were pulled from the ground to make a hole in the line. Tyrion led his party through.
“他们是我亲密的朋友和忠诚的部属，”提利昂道，“我父亲在哪儿？”
Lord Tywin’s camp spread over leagues. Chella’s estimate of twenty thousand men could not be far wrong. The common men camped out in the open, but the knights had thrown up tents, and some of the high lords had erected pavilions as large as houses. Tyrion spied the red ox of the Presters, Lord Crakehall’s brindled boar, the burning tree of Marbrand, the badger of Lydden. Knights called out to him as he cantered past, and men-at-arms gaped at the clansmen in open astonishment.
“他暂时将岔路口的旅店当成指挥总部。”
Shagga was gaping back; beyond a certainty, he had never seen so many men, horses, and weapons in all his days. The rest of the mountain brigands did a better job of guarding their faces, but Tyrion had no doubts that they were full as much in awe. Better and better. The more impressed they were with the power of the Lannisters, the easier they would be to command.
提利昂不禁苦笑，路口那家旅店！或许天上诸神当真有其公理在。“我这就去见他。”
The inn and its stables were much as he remembered, though little more than tumbled stones and blackened foundations remained where the rest of the village had stood. A gibbet had been erected in the yard, and the body that swung there was covered with ravens. At Tyrion’s approach they took to the air, squawking and flapping their black wings. He dismounted and glanced up at what remained of the corpse. The birds had eaten her lips and eyes and most of her cheeks, baring her stained red teeth in a hideous smile. “A room, a meal, and a flagon of wine, that was all I asked,” he reminded her with a sigh of reproach.
“遵命，大人。”佛列蒙爵士调转马头，一声令下，便有人将三排木桩从地上拔起，空出一条路来，让提利昂带着他的人马穿过。
Boys emerged hesitantly from the stables to see to their horses. Shagga did not want to give his up. “The lad won’t steal your mare,” Tyrion assured him. “He only wants to give her some oats and water and brush out her coat.” Shagga’s coat could have used a good brushing too, but it would have been less than tactful to mention it. “You have my word, the horse will not be harmed.”
泰温公爵的军营广达数里，齐拉估计的两万人与事实相去不远。普通士兵露天扎营，骑士则搭建帐篷，而有些领主的营帐大得像房屋一样。提利昂瞥见普莱斯特家族的红牛纹饰、克雷赫伯爵的斑纹野猪、马尔布兰家族的燃烧之树，以及莱顿家族的獾。他快步跑过，骑士们纷纷向他打招呼，而民兵见了那群原住民，吃惊得张大了嘴。
Glaring, Shagga let go his grip on the reins. “This is the horse of Shagga son of Dolf,” he roared at the stableboy.
夏嘎的嘴张得也不小；显然他这辈子都没见过这么多人、马和武器。其他几名高山盗匪的惊讶之情掩饰得稍微好一点，但提利昂认为他们的惊讶程度绝不在夏嘎之下。情况对他越来越有利了，他们越是对兰尼斯特家的势力感到折服，就越容易听他摆布。
“If he doesn’t give her back, chop off his manhood and feed it to the goats,” Tyrion promised. “Provided you can find some.”
旅店和马厩与记忆中相去不远，只是村里的其他屋舍如今只剩乱石残垣和焦黑地基。旅店院子里搭起了一座绞刑台，挂在上面的尸体前后摇摆，全身停满了乌鸦。提利昂接近时，乌鸦纷纷“嘎嘎”怪叫，振翅腾空。他跳下马，抬头看着尸体的残余部分。她的嘴唇、眼睛和大半脸颊都给啃了个干净，腥红的牙齿暴露在外，露出一抹狰狞的笑容。“我不过跟你要一个房间、一顿晚饭和一瓶酒罢了。”他语带指责地叹了口气。
A pair of house guards in crimson cloaks and lion-crested helms stood under the inn’s sign, on either side of the door. Tyrion recognized their captain. “My father?”
几个小男孩迟疑地从马厩里出来照料他们的马匹，可夏嘎不愿交出自己的坐骑。“这小鬼不会偷你的母马啦，”提利昂向他保证。“他只是想喂它吃点燕麦，喝些水，刷刷背罢了。”老实说，夏嘎自己的毛皮外衣也很需要刷一刷，不过直接说出口未免太没技巧了。“我跟你保证，马儿绝不会受伤。”
“In the common room, m’lord.”
夏嘎瞪大眼睛，松开紧握缰绳的手。“这是多夫之子夏嘎的马。”他朝马厩小厮咆哮。
“My men will want meat and mead,” Tyrion told him. “See that they get it.” He entered the inn, and there was Father.
“如果他不把马还你，就剁掉他的命根子，拿去喂山羊。”提利昂保证，“不过你得先找到山羊。”
Tywin Lannister, Lord of Casterly Rock and Warden of the West, was in his middle fifties, yet hard as a man of twenty. Even seated, he was tall, with long legs, broad shoulders, a flat stomach. His thin arms were corded with muscle. When his once-thick golden hair had begun to recede, he had commanded his barber to shave his head; Lord Tywin did not believe in half measures. He razored his lip and chin as well, but kept his sidewhiskers, two great thickets of wiry golden hair that covered most of his cheeks from ear to jaw. His eyes were a pale green, flecked with gold. A fool more foolish than most had once jested that even Lord Tywin’s shit was flecked with gold. Some said the man was still alive, deep in the bowels of Casterly Rock.
旅店招牌下站了两个红袍狮盔的卫士，一左一右看守着门。提利昂认出了侍卫队长。“我父亲人呢？”
Ser Kevan Lannister, his father’s only surviving brother, was sharing a flagon of ale with Lord Tywin when Tyrion entered the common room. His uncle was portly and balding, with a close-cropped yellow beard that followed the line of his massive jaw. Ser Kevan saw him first. “Tyrion,” he said in surprise.
“在大厅里，大人。”
“Uncle,” Tyrion said, bowing. “And my lord father. What a pleasure to find you here.”
“我的人需要吃喝，”提利昂告诉他，“交给你打点。”他走进旅店，立刻看到了父亲。
Lord Tywin did not stir from his chair, but he did give his dwarf son a long, searching look. “I see that the rumors of your demise were unfounded.”
身兼凯岩城公爵与西境守护二职的泰温·兰尼斯特现年五十多岁，却健壮得像个二十岁的小伙子。即便坐着，他依旧显得身躯高大，两腿颀长，肩膀宽厚，小腹平坦，手臂虽细却肌肉结实。自从原本蓬厚的金发开始渐渐稀少后，他便命令理发师把他剃成光头；泰温公爵是个做事果敢决断的人，因此他也把唇边和下巴的胡子通通刮干净，只留两颊鬓须，两大丛结实的金胡子从双耳一直覆到下颚。他的眼睛淡绿中带着金黄。曾经有个愚蠢的弄臣开玩笑说泰温大人连拉的屎里都有黄金——此人据说还活着，不过住在凯岩城最深处的地牢里。
“Sorry to disappoint you, Father,” Tyrion said. “No need to leap up and embrace me, I wouldn’t want you to strain yourself.” He crossed the room to their table, acutely conscious of the way his stunted legs made him waddle with every step. Whenever his father’s eyes were on him, he became uncomfortably aware of all his deformities and shortcomings. “Kind of you to go to war for me,” he said as he climbed into a chair and helped himself to a cup of his father’s ale.
提利昂走进旅店大厅时，泰温公爵正和他仅存的手足——凯冯·兰尼斯特爵士喝着一瓶麦酒。叔叔有些发胖，头也快秃了，下巴全是肉，黄胡子修剪得很短。凯冯爵士首先看到他。“提利昂？”他惊讶地说。
“By my lights, it was you who started this,” Lord Tywin replied. “Your brother Jaime would never have meekly submitted to capture at the hands of a woman.”
“叔叔，”提利昂一鞠躬，“父亲大人。见到你们真好。”
“That’s one way we differ, Jaime and I. He’s taller as well, you may have noticed.”
泰温公爵并未起身，他只意味深长地打量了侏儒儿子一番。“看来关于你已死的传言不攻自破了。”
His father ignored the sally. “The honor of our House was at stake. I had no choice but to ride. No man sheds Lannister blood with impunity.”
“真抱歉让您失望，父亲大人。”提利昂说，“千万不用跳起来拥抱我，我可不希望您扭到腰。”他穿过房间，走到桌边，一边走一边觉得自己畸形的腿摇摇摆摆、格外醒目。只要父亲的视线一刻停留在他身上，他就很不自在地想起自己所有的畸形和缺陷。“非常感谢您为我出兵打仗。”说着，他爬上一张椅子，自顾自地拿起父亲的酒瓶倒酒。
“Hear Me Roar,” Tyrion said, grinning. The Lannister words. “Truth be told, none of my blood was actually shed, although it was a close thing once or twice. Morrec and Jyck were killed.”
“得了吧，乱局都是你挑起的。”泰温公爵回答，“换成你哥哥詹姆，他绝不会屈服于一介妇人之手。”
“I suppose you will be wanting some new men.”
“这就是詹姆和我的不同之一啦。他还比我高呢，如果您注意到的话。”
“Don’t trouble yourself, Father, I’ve acquired a few of my own.” He tried a swallow of the ale. It was brown and yeasty, so thick you could almost chew it. Very fine, in truth. A pity his father had hanged the innkeep. “How is your war going?”
父亲没理会他的俏皮话。“事关家族荣誉，除了出兵，我别无选择。让兰尼斯特家人流血的人，必受惩罚，休想全身而退！”
His uncle answered. “Well enough, for the nonce. Ser Edmure had scattered small troops of men along his borders to stop our raiding, and your lord father and I were able to destroy most of them piecemeal before they could regroup.”
“听我怒吼。”提利昂嘻嘻笑道，这是兰尼斯特家族的箴言。“说真的，其实我半滴血都没流，虽然有几次很接近。莫里斯和杰克却死了。”
“Your brother has been covering himself with glory,” his father said. “He smashed the Lords Vance and Piper at the Golden Tooth, and met the massed power of the Tullys under the walls of Riverrun. The lords of the Trident have been put to rout. Ser Edmure Tully was taken captive, with many of his knights and bannermen. Lord Blackwood led a few survivors back to Riverrun, where Jaime has them under siege. The rest fled to their own strongholds.”
“所以你需要新手下？”
“Your father and I have been marching on each in turn,” Ser Kevan said. “With Lord Blackwood gone, Raventree fell at once, and Lady Whent yielded Harrenhal for want of men to defend it. Ser Gregor burnt out the Pipers and the Brackens …”
“父亲大人，这就不用劳烦您了，我自己找了几个。”他试着咽下麦酒，酒是褐色，充满发酵的味道，非常浓，浓到几乎能咀嚼，不过的确香醇之极，真可惜父亲把老板娘给吊死了。“您的战事进展如何？”
“Leaving you unopposed?” Tyrion said.
作答的是叔叔，“到目前为止，还算顺利。艾德慕爵士将人马分散为小队，派到领土边界阻止我方突袭，你父亲大人和我在他们会合之前，就将其大部各个击破。”
“Not wholly,” Ser Kevan said. “The Mallisters still hold Seagard and Walder Frey is marshaling his levies at the Twins.”
“你哥哥打的胜仗则是一场接一场。”父亲说，“他先在金牙城外击溃凡斯伯爵和派柏伯爵的军队，随后在奔流城下与徒利家的主力部队进行决战。那一仗，三河诸侯被打得落花流水，艾德慕·徒利爵士和手下许多封臣骑士一同被俘。布莱伍德伯爵集结少数残兵逃回奔流城，闭门死守，詹姆正加紧围城。其他诸侯大都作鸟兽散，各自逃回家去了。”
“No matter,” Lord Tywin said. “Frey only takes the field when the scent of victory is in the air, and all he smells now is ruin. And Jason Mallister lacks the strength to fight alone. Once Jaime takes Riverrun, they will both be quick enough to bend the knee. Unless the Starks and the Arryns come forth to oppose us, this war is good as won.”
“而你父亲和我正一个一个消灭他们。”凯冯爵士说，“缺了布莱伍德伯爵坐镇，鸦树城立即陷落，河安伯爵夫人由于缺乏人手，也献出了赫伦堡。格雷果爵士则把派柏家和布雷肯家的领地烧得一干二净……”
“I would not fret overmuch about the Arryns if I were you,” Tyrion said. “The Starks are another matter. Lord Eddard—”
“所以没人挡得住你们啰？”提利昂说。
“—is our hostage,” his father said. “He will lead no armies while he rots in a dungeon under the Red Keep.”
“也不尽然，”凯冯爵士道，“梅利斯特家依旧保有海疆城，孪河城的瓦德·佛雷也正在召集兵马。”
“No,” Ser Kevan agreed, “but his son has called the banners and sits at Moat Cailin with a strong host around him.”
“不碍事，”泰温公爵说，“除非嗅到胜利的气息，否则佛雷家不会出兵，而眼下空中都是溃败的味道。至于杰森·梅利斯特，他缺乏单独作战的兵力，一旦詹姆攻下奔流城，他们两家自会跟着臣服。史塔克家和艾林家若不出兵，这场仗已经赢了。”
“No sword is strong until it’s been tempered,” Lord Tywin declared. “The Stark boy is a child. No doubt he likes the sound of warhorns well enough, and the sight of his banners fluttering in the wind, but in the end it comes down to butcher’s work. I doubt he has the stomach for it.”
“换作是我，不会太担心艾林家。”提利昂道，“但史塔克家就不一样了，艾德大人——”
Things had gotten interesting while he’d been away, Tyrion reflected. “And what is our fearless monarch doing whilst all this ‘butcher’s work’ is being done?” he wondered. “How has my lovely and persuasive sister gotten Robert to agree to the imprisonment of his dear friend Ned?”
“——是我们的人质。”父亲说，“人在红堡底下的地牢里发烂发臭，无法带兵打仗。”
“Robert Baratheon is dead,” his father told him. “Your nephew reigns in King’s Landing.”
“的确是没办法，”凯冯爵士同意，“但他儿子已经召集诸侯，目前正带着一支大军坐镇卡林湾。”
That did take Tyrion aback. “My sister, you mean.” He took another gulp of ale. The realm would be a much different place with Cersei ruling in place of her husband.
“任何一把剑，惟有试过之后方才知其效果。”泰温公爵表示，“史塔克家那小鬼还是个孩子，想必很喜欢号角吹奏、旗帜飘扬的景象，可战争毕竟是屠杀之事，只怕他承受不了。”
“If you have a mind to make yourself of use, I will give you a command,” his father said. “Marq Piper and Karyl Vance are loose in our rear, raiding our lands across the Red Fork.”
看来他缺席期间，局势产生了有趣的发展，提利昂心想。“当外面净在干些‘屠杀之事’的时候，咱们骁勇善战的国王陛下又在做什么呢？”他问，“我倒很想知道，我那能言善道的漂亮姐姐，究竟是怎么说服劳勃，同意囚禁他亲爱的伙伴奈德？”
Tyrion made a tsking sound. “The gall of them, fighting back. Ordinarily I’d be glad to punish such rudeness, Father, but the truth is, I have pressing business elsewhere.”
“劳勃·拜拉席恩已经死了。”父亲告诉他。“如今在君临执政的是你外甥。”
“Do you?” Lord Tywin did not seem awed. “We also have a pair of Ned Stark’s afterthoughts making a nuisance of themselves by harassing my foraging parties. Beric Dondarrion, some young lordling with delusions of valor. He has that fat jape of a priest with him, the one who likes to set his sword on fire. Do you think you might be able to deal with them as you scamper off? Without making too much a botch of it?”
这倒真令提利昂大吃一惊。“你的意思是我姐姐执政？”他又灌了一口酒。眼下瑟曦的老公死了，换她掌权，王国局势必将大为动荡。
Tyrion wiped his mouth with the back of his hand and smiled. “Father, it warms my heart to think that you might entrust me with … what, twenty men? Fifty? Are you sure you can spare so many? Well, no matter. If I should come across Thoros and Lord Beric, I shall spank them both.” He climbed down from his chair and waddled to the sideboard, where a wheel of veined white cheese sat surrounded by fruit. “First, though, I have some promises of my own to keep,” he said as he sliced off a wedge. “I shall require three thousand helms and as many hauberks, plus swords, pikes, steel spearheads, maces, battle-axes, gauntlets, gorgets, greaves, breastplates, wagons to carry all this—”
“如果你有意帮忙，我倒有个任务可以交给你。”父亲说，“马柯·派柏和卡列尔·凡斯在我们后方兴风作浪，袭击我红叉河对岸的领土。”
The door behind him opened with a crash, so violently that Tyrion almost dropped his cheese. Ser Kevan leapt up swearing as the captain of the guard went flying across the room to smash against the hearth. As he tumbled down into the cold ashes, his lion helm askew, Shagga snapped the man’s sword in two over a knee thick as a tree trunk, threw down the pieces, and lumbered into the common room. He was preceded by his stench, riper than the cheese and overpowering in the closed space. “Little redcape,” he snarled, “when next you bare steel on Shagga son of Dolf, I will chop off your manhood and roast it in the fire.”
提利昂啧了一声。“不过就是几只寄生虫捣蛋，若是平常，我会很乐意去给这些没礼貌的家伙一点颜色瞧瞧，可是父亲大人，我还可以派上别的用场。”
“What, no goats?” Tyrion said, taking a bite of cheese.
“是吗？”父亲看来不为所动。“另外还有两个奈德·史塔克的余孽，专门骚扰我们的征粮部队。一个是想逞英雄的贵族少爷贝里·唐德利恩，还有他带在身边的那个痴肥僧侣，最爱让剑喷火的那位。你能发挥你逃跑的本事，去对付他们么？当然，不能给我捅出更大的漏子。”
The other clansmen followed Shagga into the common room, Bronn with them. The sellsword gave Tyrion a rueful shrug.
提利昂用手背抹抹嘴，微笑道：“父亲，知道您这么信任我真教人感动，嗯，您要给我……二十个人？五十个？您确定拨得出这许多人手？唉，没关系，假如我碰上索罗斯和贝里大人，一定好好揍他们一顿屁股。”他爬下椅子，摇摇摆摆地走向餐具柜，柜子上摆了一盘白乳酪，周围放着水果。“不过首先，我得实现我的诺言。”他边说边切下一块奶酪。“我要三千顶头盔，三千套锁甲、剑、长枪、钢制矛头、钉头锤、战斧、铁手套、颈甲、护膝、胸甲，以及用来载运这些东西的马车——”
“Who might you be?” Lord Tywin asked, cool as snow.
身后的门轰然撞开，力道刚猛，提利昂差点松开手上的食物。凯冯爵士咒骂着跳起来，侍卫队长整个人飞过房间，撞上壁炉，滚进已经冷却的灰烬，狮盔歪在一边。夏嘎跟着闯进来，啪的一声，用他粗如树干的膝盖将队长的佩剑折成两段。随后他丢下断剑，大摇大摆地走进大厅，人还未到，全身有如烂乳酪的臭味先至，在密闭房间里显得格外呛人。“红衣小鬼，”他咆哮道，“下次你要再敢在多夫之子夏嘎面前拔剑，我就剁掉你的命根子，拿来用火烤。”
“They followed me home, Father,” Tyrion explained. “May I keep them? They don’t eat much.”
“怎么，找不到山羊？”提利昂边说边咬了口乳酪。
No one was smiling. “By what right do you savages intrude on our councils?” demanded Ser Kevan.
其他几个原住民跟随夏嘎走进大厅，波隆也在其中。佣兵有些遗憾地朝提利昂耸耸肩。
“Savages, lowlander?” Conn might have been handsome if you washed him. “We are free men, and free men by rights sit on all war councils.”
“你又是哪位？”泰温公爵问，口气冰冷如霜。
“Which one is the lion lord?” Chella asked.
“父亲，他们跟着我一道回家。”提利昂解释，“我可以把他们留下来吗？他们吃不了多少的。”
“They are both old men,” announced Timett son of Timett, who had yet to see his twentieth year.
无人发笑。“你们这帮野蛮人凭什么打断我们的会议？”凯冯爵士质问。
Ser Kevan’s hand went to his sword hilt, but his brother placed two fingers on his wrist and held him fast. Lord Tywin seemed unperturbed. “Tyrion, have you forgotten your courtesies? Kindly acquaint us with our … honored guests.”
“平地人，你说我们是野蛮人？”若你帮他洗个澡，康恩其实还算得上英俊。“我们乃是自由人，自由人天生有权参加所有的作战会议。”
Tyrion licked his fingers. “With pleasure,” he said. “The fair maid is Chella daughter of Cheyk of the Black Ears.”
“你们哪一个是狮子酋长？”齐拉问。
“I’m no maid,” Chella protested. “My sons have taken fifty ears among them.”
“他们两个都是老头子。”未满二十岁的提魅之子提魅宣布。
“May they take fifty more.” Tyrion waddled away from her. “This is Conn son of Coratt. Shagga son of Dolf is the one who looks like Casterly Rock with hair. They are Stone Crows. Here is Ulf son of Umar of the Moon Brothers, and here Timett son of Timett, a red hand of the Burned Men. And this is Bronn, a sellsword of no particular allegiance. He has already changed sides twice in the short time I’ve known him, you and he ought to get on famously, Father.” To Bronn and the clansmen he said, “May I present my lord father, Tywin son of Tytos of House Lannister, Lord of Casterly Rock, Warden of the West, Shield of Lannisport, and once and future Hand of the King.”
凯冯爵士伸手拔剑，但他哥哥伸出两根手指，按在他的手腕上，表示制止。泰温公爵不动声色。“提利昂，你的礼貌上哪儿去了？还不快帮我们介绍这几位……贵客。”
Lord Tywin rose, dignified and correct. “Even in the west, we know the prowess of the warrior clans of the Mountains of the Moon. What brings you down from your strongholds, my lords?”
提利昂舔舔手指。“乐意之至，”他说，“这位美少女是黑耳部的齐克之女齐拉。”
“Horses,” said Shagga.
“我不是什么少女，”齐拉抗议，“我的儿子们已经割了五十只耳朵了。”
“A promise of silk and steel,” said Timett son of Timett.
“愿他们再多割五十只。”提利昂摇摇摆摆地从她身边走开。“这位是科拉特之子康恩，生得活像凯岩城堡，一身长毛的是多夫之子夏嘎，他们两个是石鸦部的。这位是月人部的乌玛尔之子乌尔夫。这位是灼人部的红手，提魅之子提魅。这是佣兵波隆，并无特定效忠对象，在我认识他的短短时间里，已经两次变节，父亲大人，他跟你应该很和得来。”然后他转向波隆和原住民，“容我为各位介绍家父，兰尼斯特家族的泰陀斯之子泰温、凯岩城公爵、西境守护、兰尼斯港之盾，以及永远的国王之手。”
Tyrion was about to tell his lord father how he proposed to reduce the Vale of Arryn to a smoking wasteland, but he was never given the chance. The door banged open again. The messenger gave Tyrion’s clansmen a quick, queer look as he dropped to one knee before Lord Tywin. “My lord,” he said, “Ser Addam bid me tell you that the Stark host is moving down the causeway.”
泰温公爵站起来，那威严和气势完全符合上述头衔。“即便远处西境，明月山脉各部落战士的英勇事迹我们也时有耳闻。诸位可敬的大人，什么风将您们从自家要塞吹到这儿来的呢？”
Lord Tywin Lannister did not smile. Lord Tywin never smiled, but Tyrion had learned to read his father’s pleasure all the same, and it was there on his face. “So the wolfling is leaving his den to play among the lions,” he said in a voice of quiet satisfaction. “Splendid. Return to Ser Addam and tell him to fall back. He is not to engage the northerners until we arrive, but I want him to harass their flanks and draw them farther south.”
“我们骑马。”夏嘎说。
“It will be as you command.” The rider took his leave.
“他答应给我们衣服和武器。”提魅之子提魅说。
“We are well situated here,” Ser Kevan pointed out. “Close to the ford and ringed by pits and spikes. If they are coming south, I say let them come, and break themselves against us.”
提利昂正打算将他那把艾林谷化为冒烟荒原的构想告诉父亲，大门却又再度打开，便只得暂时作罢。使者用怪异的眼神飞快地瞥了提利昂那群原住民一眼，然后在泰温公爵面前单膝跪下。“启禀大人，”他说，“亚当爵士要我向您报告，史塔克军已开始沿堤道南下。”
“The boy may hang back or lose his courage when he sees our numbers,” Lord Tywin replied. “The sooner the Starks are broken, the sooner I shall be free to deal with Stannis Baratheon. Tell the drummers to beat assembly, and send word to Jaime that I am marching against Robb Stark.”
泰温·兰尼斯特公爵没有笑，泰温公爵从来不笑，但提利昂早已学会观察父亲的喜悦神情，此时此刻这样的神情明明白白地写在他脸上。“这么说来，小狼终于挪窝了，准备来跟狮子们玩玩了。”他用略带满足的口气说，“好极了。你回去吩咐亚当爵士，要他立刻撤退，在我军主力抵达之前，不准与北方人交战，但我希望他派人骚扰对方侧翼，并尽量吸引他们南下。”
“As you will,” Ser Kevan said.
“一切照您吩咐。”传令兵骑马离开。
Tyrion watched with a grim fascination as his lord father turned next to the half-wild clansmen. “It is said that the men of the mountain clans are warriors without fear.”
“这里地势良好，”凯冯爵士指出，“不仅接近浅滩，周围又布下了陷坑和尖桩。假如他们南下，我看不如以逸待劳，在此迎头痛击。”
“It is said truly,” Conn of the Stone Crows answered.
“等见识我方的兵力后，那小鬼有可能丧失勇气，直接撤退。”泰温公爵回答，“而我们越早击败史塔克军，就能越快摆脱牵制，抽出手来，全力对付史坦尼斯。拜拉席恩。吩咐鼓手敲集合令，并派人传话通知詹姆，我要即刻进军与罗柏·史塔克决战。”
“And the women,” Chella added.
“遵命。”凯冯爵士道。
“Ride with me against my enemies, and you shall have all my son promised you, and more,” Lord Tywin told them.
提利昂饶富兴味地看着父亲转身面向这群半野蛮的原住民。“据说高山部落的男子是勇猛无惧的战士。”
“Would you pay us with our own coin?” Ulf son of Umar said. “Why should we need the father’s promise, when we have the son’s?”
“没错。”石鸦部的康恩回答。
“I said nothing of need,” Lord Tywin replied. “My words were courtesy, nothing more. You need not join us. The men of the winterlands are made of iron and ice, and even my boldest knights fear to face them.”
“女人也一样，”齐拉补充。
Oh, deftly done , Tyrion thought, smiling crookedly.
“与我一同出兵抗敌，我保证你们能得到我儿子承诺的一切，甚至更多。”泰温公爵告诉他们。
“The Burned Men fear nothing. Timett son of Timett will ride with the lions.”
“我们怎么知道你会遵守约定，”乌玛尔之子乌尔夫说，“况且我们已经有了儿子的承诺，干嘛还需要父亲的？”
“Wherever the Burned Men go, the Stone Crows have been there first,” Conn declared hotly. “We ride as well.”
“我没说你们‘需要’，”泰温公爵回答，“我那是客套话，没别的意思。你们不需要和我们并肩作战，来自冬境北国的人乃是玄冰铸成，碰上他们，连我手下最勇敢的骑士也会害怕。”
“Shagga son of Dolf will chop off their manhoods and feed them to the crows.”
喔，这招漂亮，提利昂心想，脸上露出狡猾的微笑。
“We will ride with you, lion lord,” Chella daughter of Cheyk agreed, “but only if your halfman son goes with us. He has bought his breath with promises. Until we hold the steel he has pledged us, his life is ours.”
“灼人部什么都不怕，提魅之子提魅将和狮子一起打仗。”
Lord Tywin turned his gold-flecked eyes on his son.
“灼人部去过的地方，石鸦部都先去了。”康恩不甘示弱地表示，“我们也去。”
“Joy,” Tyrion said with a resigned smile.
“多夫之子夏嘎会剁掉他们的命根子，拿去喂乌鸦。”
*SANSA
“狮子酋长，我们跟你一起去，”齐克之女齐拉同意。“但你的半人儿子也要跟我们在一起。他用种种承诺换得一条命，在我们拿到他答应的武器之前，他的命是我们的。”
T he walls of the throne room had been stripped bare, the hunting tapestries that King Robert loved taken down and stacked in the corner in an untidy heap.
泰温转头，用那双金瞳眼睛看着儿子。
Ser Mandon Moore went to take his place under the throne beside two of his fellows of the Kingsguard. Sansa hovered by the door, for once unguarded. The queen had given her freedom of the castle as a reward for being good, yet even so, she was escorted everywhere she went. “Honor guards for my daughter-to-be,” the queen called them, but they did not make Sansa feel honored.
“乐意之至。”提利昂听天由命地笑了笑。
“Freedom of the castle” meant that she could go wherever she chose within the Red Keep so long as she promised not to go beyond the walls, a promise Sansa had been more than willing to give. She couldn’t have gone beyond the walls anyway. The gates were watched day and night by Janos Slynt’s gold cloaks, and Lannister house guards were always about as well. Besides, even if she could leave the castle, where would she go? It was enough that she could walk in the yard, pick flowers in Myrcella’s garden, and visit the sept to pray for her father. Sometimes she prayed in the godswood as well, since the Starks kept the old gods.
第五十八章 珊莎
This was the first court session of Joffrey’s reign, so Sansa looked about nervously. A line of Lannister house guards stood beneath the western windows, a line of gold-cloaked City Watchmen beneath the east. Of smallfolk and commoners, she saw no sign, but under the gallery a cluster of lords great and small milled restlessly. There were no more than twenty, where a hundred had been accustomed to wait upon King Robert.
王座厅里，劳勃国王生前最喜爱的挂毯织锦通通被扯了下来，杂乱无章地堆在角落，如今四壁萧然。
Sansa slipped in among them, murmuring greetings as she worked her way toward the front. She recognized black-skinned Jalabhar Xho, gloomy Ser Aron Santagar, the Redwyne twins Horror and Slobber … only none of them seemed to recognize her . Or if they did, they shied away as if she had the grey plague. Sickly Lord Gyles covered his face at her approach and feigned a fit of coughing, and when funny drunken Ser Dontos started to hail her, Ser Balon Swann whispered in his ear and he turned away.
曼登·穆尔爵士前去守在王座底，与他另外两名御林铁卫弟兄一道站岗，所以暂时无人看管在门边徘徊的珊莎。太后赐给她在城堡里自由来去的权利，作为她表现良好的奖赏。但即便如此，不论她走到何处，身旁依旧有人紧随。“这是给我准媳妇的荣誉护卫。”太后这么称呼他们，然而珊莎却一点也不觉得受尊重。
And so many others were missing. Where had the rest of them gone? Sansa wondered. Vainly, she searched for friendly faces. Not one of them would meet her eyes. It was as if she had become a ghost, dead before her time.
所谓“在城堡里自由来去”，指的是她可以在红堡里任意行动，只要她答应不走出城墙以外。这个要求珊莎倒是很乐于配合，一来城门日夜有杰诺斯·史林特的金袍卫士或兰尼斯特家的武士看守，她本来就不可能出去；二来，就算她真的离开城堡，又能去什么地方呢？只要能在广场里散散步，到弥赛拉的花园采几朵花，或是造访圣堂，为父亲祈祷，她便心满意足了。有时候她也会在神木林祷告，因为史塔克家族是信奉古老诸神的。
Grand Maester Pycelle was seated alone at the council table, seemingly asleep, his hands clasped together atop his beard. She saw Lord Varys hurry into the hall, his feet making no sound. A moment later Lord Baelish entered through the tall doors in the rear, smiling. He chatted amiably with Ser Balon and Ser Dontos as he made his way to the front. Butterflies fluttered nervously in Sansa’s stomach. I shouldn’t be afraid , she told herself. I have nothing to be afraid of, it will all come out well, Joff loves me and the queen does too, she said so .
今天，是乔佛里登基后首次上朝听政，珊莎很紧张地四处张望。西窗下站了一排兰尼斯特卫士，东窗下则是身穿金色披风的都城守卫队。她没见着任何平民百姓，旁听席上也只有一小群贵族焦躁不安地来回走动。他们为数不过二十，从前劳勃国王的时代，出席者动辄百人以上。
A herald’s voice rang out. “All hail His Grace, Joffrey of the Houses Baratheon and Lannister, the First of his Name, King of the Andals, the Rhoynar, and the First Men, and Lord of the Seven Kingdoms. All hail his lady mother, Cersei of House Lannister, Queen Regent, Light of the West, and Protector of the Realm.”
珊莎走进旁听席，一边穿梭着往前排移动，一边喃喃向人们问好。她认出黑皮肤的贾拉巴·梭尔，神情郁闷的艾伦·桑塔加爵士，以及雷德温家的双胞胎恐怖爵士和流口水爵士……可他们却似乎都不认得她。或者他们认得，却把她当瘟疫般避之惟恐不及。憔悴的盖尔斯伯爵一见她走近，便遮住脸，假装剧烈咳嗽；而喝得醉醺醺，人又顶滑稽的唐托斯爵士正要向她打招呼，只见巴隆·史文爵士在他耳边低语了几句，他便转开头去。
Ser Barristan Selmy, resplendent in white plate, led them in. Ser Arys Oakheart escorted the queen, while Ser Boros Blount walked beside Joffrey, so six of the Kingsguard were now in the hall, all the White Swords save Jaime Lannister alone. Her prince—no, her king now!—took the steps of the Iron Throne two at a time, while his mother was seated with the council. Joff wore plush black velvets slashed with crimson, a shimmering cloth-of-gold cape with a high collar, and on his head a golden crown crusted with rubies and black diamonds.
还有好多好多人都不见了。其他人到哪里去了？珊莎纳闷。她徒劳无功地搜索友善的脸孔，然而谁都不愿正眼瞧她。她仿佛成了幽魂，还未寿终正寝，便已宣告死亡。
When Joffrey turned to look out over the hall, his eye caught Sansa’s. He smiled, seated himself, and spoke. “It is a king’s duty to punish the disloyal and reward those who are true. Grand Maester Pycelle, I command you to read my decrees.”
派席尔大学士独自坐在议事桌边，两手撑在胡子下，那样子像是睡着了。接着，她看见瓦里斯伯爵匆匆忙忙地进入大厅，走路没有半点声音。过了一会儿，贝里席伯爵也笑盈盈地从大门走进来，一边和蔼可亲地与巴隆爵士和唐托斯爵士闲话家常，一边朝大厅前方移动。珊莎的肚子绞成一团，好似有成群蝴蝶飞舞。我不该害怕的，她告诉自己，我没什么好怕的，一切都会圆满收场，因为小乔爱我，太后也爱我，她亲口说的。
Pycelle pushed himself to his feet. He was clad in a magnificent robe of thick red velvet, with an ermine collar and shiny gold fastenings. From a drooping sleeve, heavy with gilded scrollwork, he drew a parchment, unrolled it, and began to read a long list of names, commanding each in the name of king and council to present themselves and swear their fealty to Joffrey. Failing that, they would be adjudged traitors, their lands and titles forfeit to the throne.
司仪的声音响起：“恭迎安达尔人、洛伊拿人和先民的国王，七国统治者，拜拉席恩家族与兰尼斯特家族的乔佛里一世陛下。恭迎陛下的母亲大人，西境之光，全境守护者，摄政太后，兰尼斯特家族的瑟曦陛下。”
The names he read made Sansa hold her breath. Lord Stannis Baratheon, his lady wife, his daughter. Lord Renly Baratheon. Both Lord Royces and their sons. Ser Loras Tyrell. Lord Mace Tyrell, his brothers, uncles, sons. The red priest, Thoros of Myr. Lord Beric Dondarrion. Lady Lysa Arryn and her son, the little Lord Robert. Lord Hoster Tully, his brother Ser Brynden, his son Ser Edmure. Lord Jason Mallister. Lord Bryce Caron of the Marches. Lord Tytos Blackwood. Lord Walder Frey and his heir Ser Stevron. Lord Karyl Vance. Lord Jonos Bracken. Lady Shella Whent. Doran Martell, Prince of Dorne, and all his sons. So many , she thought as Pycelle read on and on, it will take a whole flock of ravens to send out these commands .
一身灿烂白甲的巴利斯坦·赛尔弥爵士带领他们走进来，亚历斯·奥克赫特爵士护送太后，柏洛斯·布劳恩爵士则走在乔佛里旁边。眼下六名御林铁卫都在大厅，众白骑士齐聚一堂，只有詹姆·兰尼斯特缺席。她的白马王子——不对，是她的国王了！——三步并作两步地爬上铁王座的阶梯，他的母后则和重臣们坐在一起。小乔身穿绣红线的黑天鹅绒外衣，肩披闪闪发光的高领金缕披风，头戴镶嵌红玉黑钻石的黄金宝冠。
And at the end, near last, came the names Sansa had been dreading. Lady Catelyn Stark. Robb Stark. Brandon Stark, Rickon Stark, Arya Stark. Sansa stifled a gasp. Arya . They wanted Arya to present herself and swear an oath … it must mean her sister had fled on the galley, she must be safe at Winterfell by now …
乔佛里转头环顾大厅，与珊莎四目相交，他面露微笑，缓缓坐下，然后开口道：“惩治叛徒，奖励忠臣，此乃国王职责所在。派席尔大学士，我命你宣读我的判决。”
Grand Maester Pycelle rolled up the list, tucked it up his left sleeve, and pulled another parchment from his right. He cleared his throat and resumed. “In the place of the traitor Eddard Stark, it is the wish of His Grace that Tywin Lannister, Lord of Casterly Rock and Warden of the West, take up the office of Hand of the King, to speak with his voice, lead his armies against his enemies, and carry out his royal will. So the king has decreed. The small council consents.
派席尔站起来，他衣着华丽，身穿厚重的红天鹅绒长袍，貂皮衣领，亮金饰带，衣袖低垂，上面满是镀金涡形装饰。他从袖子里抽出一卷羊皮纸，展开之后，开始宣读一长串的名单，并以国王和重臣之名，命令他们即刻上朝宣誓效忠，倘若不从，将被视作叛徒，其领地和封号均由王室收回。
“In the place of the traitor Stannis Baratheon, it is the wish of His Grace that his lady mother, the Queen Regent Cersei Lannister, who has ever been his staunchest support, be seated upon his small council, that she may help him rule wisely and with justice. So the king has decreed. The small council consents.”
他念出的名字令珊莎屏住了呼吸：史坦尼斯·拜拉席恩公爵夫妇和他们的女儿，蓝礼公爵，罗伊斯伯爵兄弟和他们的儿子，洛拉斯·提利尔爵士，梅斯·提利尔公爵及其兄弟、叔父和儿子，密尔的红袍僧索罗斯，贝里·唐德利恩伯爵，莱沙·艾林夫人和她的儿子小劳勃，霍斯特·徒利公爵及其弟布林登爵士、其子艾德慕爵士，杰森·梅利斯特伯爵，边疆地的布莱斯·卡伦伯爵，泰陀斯·布莱伍德伯爵，瓦德·佛雷侯爵和他的继承人史提夫伦爵士，卡列尔·凡斯伯爵，裘诺·布雷肯伯爵，希拉·河安伯爵夫人，多恩亲王道朗·马泰尔及其所有子嗣。好多人啊，她一边听派席尔念个不休，心里一边想，光把这些命令送出去，就得用上一整群的渡鸦。
Sansa heard a soft murmuring from the lords around her, but it was quickly stilled. Pycelle continued.
最后，接近末尾时，珊莎害怕已久的名字终于出现：凯特琳·史塔克夫人，罗柏·史塔克，布兰登·史塔克，瑞肯·史塔克，艾莉亚·史塔克。珊莎差点没叫出声。艾莉亚？他们竟然要艾莉亚上朝宣誓效忠……这么说来妹妹肯定已经乘船逃走，安全地回到临冬城了……
“It is also the wish of His Grace that his loyal servant, Janos Slynt, Commander of the City Watch of King’s Landing, be at once raised to the rank of lord and granted the ancient seat of Harrenhal with all its attendant lands and incomes, and that his sons and grandsons shall hold these honors after him until the end of time. It is moreover his command that Lord Slynt be seated immediately upon his small council, to assist in the governance of the realm. So the king has decreed. The small council consents.”
派席尔大学士卷起名单，塞进左手袖子，然后从右边袖子抽出另一张羊皮纸。他清清喉咙，继续念道：“为取代叛徒艾德·史塔克，遵照国王陛下的意愿，由凯岩城公爵暨西境守护泰温·兰尼斯特接任国王之手一职，以国王之名统理政事，率军讨平乱党，传达其意旨。陛下有令，重臣赞同。”
Sansa glimpsed motion from the corner of her eye as Janos Slynt made his entrance. This time the muttering was louder and angrier. Proud lords whose houses went back thousands of years made way reluctantly for the balding, frog-faced commoner as he marched past. Golden scales had been sewn onto the black velvet of his doublet and rang together softly with each step. His cloak was checked black-and-gold satin. Two ugly boys who must have been his sons went before him, struggling with the weight of a heavy metal shield as tall as they were. For his sigil he had taken a bloody spear, gold on a night-black field. The sight of it raised goose prickles up and down Sansa’s arms.
“为取代叛徒史坦尼斯·拜拉席恩，遵照国王陛下的意愿，由摄政太后瑟曦·兰尼斯特接任其朝廷重臣一职，以始终如一之可靠支持，协助其治国以睿智，判决以正义。陛下有令，重臣赞同。”
As Lord Slynt took his place, Grand Maester Pycelle resumed. “Lastly, in these times of treason and turmoil, with our beloved Robert so lately dead, it is the view of the council that the life and safety of King Joffrey is of paramount importance …” He looked to the queen.
珊莎听见四周的贵族窃窃私语，然而耳语声很快平息下来。派席尔继续念诵：“对于尽忠职守之君临都城守卫队长杰诺斯·史林特，国王陛下亦希望将其立刻擢升为贵族之列，并赐予历史悠久之赫伦堡及其所有封地税赋。其子嗣将世代继承此等荣耀，万世不辍。由是，陛下有令，史林特伯爵即刻成为朝廷重臣，助其统御国事。陛下有令，重臣赞同。”
Cersei stood. “Ser Barristan Selmy, stand forth.”
珊莎的眼角余光瞥见杰诺斯·史林特走了进来。这回议论声更大，且夹杂了愤怒的话音。许多拥有几千年族史的高傲领主很不情愿让到两旁，好让这头顶渐秃，面目如蛙的平民过去。他的黑天鹅绒长衫上镶了纯金鳞片，每走一步就丁当轻响，肩头则是黑金相间的锦缎格子披风。两名相貌丑陋的男孩走在他前面，步履踉跄地举着与他们等高的金属重盾，这必定是他的儿子无疑。他为自己选择的家徽是一根金色的染血长枪，底面漆黑如夜。珊莎见了不禁手上起了鸡皮疙瘩。
Ser Barristan had been standing at the foot of the Iron Throne, as still as any statue, but now he went to one knee and bowed his head. “Your Grace, I am yours to command.”
等史林特伯爵就位后，派席尔国师继续念：“最后，于此密谋四起、动乱不堪的危殆之际，吾人备受爱戴的劳勃国王新近驾崩，吾等重臣认为乔佛里国王之生命安危实乃首要之急……”他望向太后。
“Rise, Ser Barristan,” Cersei Lannister said. “You may remove your helm.”
瑟曦站起来。“巴利斯坦·赛尔弥爵士听命。”
“My lady?” Standing, the old knight took off his high white helm, though he did not seem to understand why.
巴利斯坦爵士原本站在铁王座底，有如雕像般纹丝不动，此刻他单膝跪下，低头道：“太后陛下，微臣听候您的差遣。”
“You have served the realm long and faithfully, good ser, and every man and woman in the Seven Kingdoms owes you thanks. Yet now I fear your service is at an end. It is the wish of king and council that you lay down your heavy burden.”
“请起，巴利斯坦爵士。”瑟曦·兰尼斯特道，“您可以卸下头盔。”
“My … burden? I fear I … I do not …”
“陛下？”老骑士起身，摘下他的高顶白盔，却有些不知所措。
The new-made lord, Janos Slynt, spoke up, his voice heavy and blunt. “Her Grace is trying to tell you that you are relieved as Lord Commander of the Kingsguard.”
“爵士先生，长久以来您为国效命，尽忠职守，七大王国中每位善男信女皆对您心怀感激。然而，恐怕您的服务现在必须告一段落，国王和吾等重臣都希望您能卸下您的沉重负担。”
The tall, white-haired knight seemed to shrink as he stood there, scarcely breathing. “Your Grace,” he said at last. “The Kingsguard is a Sworn Brotherhood. Our vows are taken for life. Only death may relieve the Lord Commander of his sacred trust.”
“我的……负担？恐怕我……我不……”
“Whose death, Ser Barristan?” The queen’s voice was soft as silk, but her words carried the whole length of the hall. “Yours, or your king’s?”
这时新科贵族杰诺斯·史林特开了口，语气沉重，直截了当：“太后陛下的意思是，您御林铁卫队长的职务已被解除了。”
“You let my father die,” Joffrey said accusingly from atop the Iron Throne. “You’re too old to protect anybody.”
高大的白发骑士站在原地，整个人仿佛顿时小了一圈，喘不过气来，“陛下，”最后他终于开口，“御林铁卫乃宣誓效命的兄弟，立下誓言，即为终身，惟死方能解除铁卫队长所负之神圣使命。”
Sansa watched as the knight peered up at his new king. She had never seen him look his years before, yet now he did. “Your Grace,” he said. “I was chosen for the White Swords in my twenty-third year. It was all I had ever dreamed, from the moment I first took sword in hand. I gave up all claim to my ancestral keep. The girl I was to wed married my cousin in my place, I had no need of land or sons, my life would be lived for the realm. Ser Gerold Hightower himself heard my vows … to ward the king with all my strength … to give my blood for his … I fought beside the White Bull and Prince Lewyn of Dorne … beside Ser Arthur Dayne, the Sword of the Morning. Before I served your father, I helped shield King Aerys, and his father Jaehaerys before him … three kings …”
“巴利斯坦爵士，敢问是谁的死？”太后的声音虽轻柔如丝，话中所言却震慑全场。“是你，还是你的国王？”
“And all of them dead,” Littlefinger pointed out.
“你保护不了我父亲，”铁王座上的乔佛里语带指控地说，“你年纪太大，谁都保护不了了。”
“Your time is done,” Cersei Lannister announced. “Joffrey requires men around him who are young and strong. The council has determined that Ser Jaime Lannister will take your place as the Lord Commander of Sworn Brothers of the White Swords.”
珊莎看着骑士抬眼凝望他的新国王，过去她从不觉得他年事已高，如今他却老态毕露。“陛下，”他说，“我二十三岁那年被选为白骑士。而自我初次掌剑以来，那便是我惟一所求。我放弃了家族古堡的继承权，原本要与我成婚的女孩嫁给我堂弟，我不需封地，无能子嗣，终我一生，惟有为国奉献。我宣誓时杰洛·海塔尔爵士为见证人……我宣誓尽我所能保护国王……为他抛头颅、洒热血……我曾与白牛和多恩领的勒文亲王……以及“拂晓神剑”亚瑟·戴恩爵士并肩作战。在我为您父王效命之前，我守护过伊里斯国王，以及他的父亲杰赫里斯……我曾为三个国王效力……”
“The Kingslayer,” Ser Barristan said, his voice hard with contempt. “The false knight who profaned his blade with the blood of the king he had sworn to defend.”
“结果他们通通都死了。”小指头指出。
“Have a care for your words, ser,” the queen warned. “You are speaking of our beloved brother, your king’s own blood.”
“你的职务到此为止，”瑟曦·兰尼斯特宣布，“乔佛里身边需要年轻力壮的人。御前会议已经决定，由詹姆·兰尼斯特爵士接任你的职务，担任白骑士弟兄们的队长。”
Lord Varys spoke, gentler than the others. “We are not unmindful of your service, good ser. Lord Tywin Lannister has generously agreed to grant you a handsome tract of land north of Lannisport, beside the sea, with gold and men sufficient to build you a stout keep, and servants to see to your every need.”
“弑君者？”巴利斯坦爵士口气严厉，语带轻蔑。“就那个以他誓言守护的国王的鲜血来玷污自己宝剑的虚伪骑士吗？”
Ser Barristan looked up sharply. “A hall to die in, and men to bury me. I thank you, my lords … but I spit upon your pity.” He reached up and undid the clasps that held his cloak in place, and the heavy white garment slithered from his shoulders to fall in a heap on the floor. His helmet dropped with a clang . “I am a knight,” he told them. He opened the silver fastenings of his breastplate and let that fall as well. “I shall die a knight.”
“爵士先生，请注意您的措辞。”太后警告他，“此人乃是我挚爱的弟弟，当今国王的亲舅。”
“A naked knight, it would seem,” quipped Littlefinger.
这时，瓦里斯伯爵开口了，口气比其他人都要轻柔。“爵士先生，对于您过去的贡献，我们并非不知感恩。泰温·兰尼斯特大人已经慷慨地同意拨出兰尼斯港北部一大块土地作为您的封疆，那里不但靠海，而且矿藏丰富，人力充足，足够修筑坚固堡垒，供应满足您一切需要的仆人。”
They all laughed then, Joffrey on his throne, and the lords standing attendance, Janos Slynt and Queen Cersei and Sandor Clegane and even the other men of the Kingsguard, the five who had been his brothers until a moment ago. Surely that must have hurt the most , Sansa thought. Her heart went out to the gallant old man as he stood shamed and red-faced, too angry to speak. Finally he drew his sword.
巴利斯坦爵士目光锐利地往上看去。“给我一个安享晚年的地方，以及为我送终的人，是吗？诸位大人，好意我心领了……但我唾弃你们的同情。”他伸手解开肩上的扣子，那件雪白披风随即落下，在地上堆成一团。紧接着“铿！”地一声，他的头盔落在地上。“我既生为骑士，”他告诉他们，一边解开胸甲的环扣，让铠甲也掉落在地。“也要死得像个骑士。”
Sansa heard someone gasp. Ser Boros and Ser Meryn moved forward to confront him, but Ser Barristan froze them in place with a look that dripped contempt. “Have no fear, sers, your king is safe … no thanks to you. Even now, I could cut through the five of you as easy as a dagger cuts cheese. If you would serve under the Kingslayer, not a one of you is fit to wear the white.” He flung his sword at the foot of the Iron Throne. “Here, boy. Melt it down and add it to the others, if you like. It will do you more good than the swords in the hands of these five. Perhaps Lord Stannis will chance to sit on it when he takes your throne.”
“像个没穿衣服的骑士，您说是吧？”小指头插话。
He took the long way out, his steps ringing loud against the floor and echoing off the bare stone walls. Lords and ladies parted to let him pass. Not until the pages had closed the great oak-and-bronze doors behind him did Sansa hear sounds again: soft voices, uneasy stirrings, the shuffle of papers from the council table. “He called me boy,” Joffrey said peevishly, sounding younger than his years. “He talked about my uncle Stannis too.”
众人哄笑一团，不论王座上的乔佛里、上朝听令的贵族、杰诺斯·史林特、瑟曦太后、桑铎·克里冈，甚至御林铁卫们——那五位几分钟前还与他同生共死的弟兄——他们都笑了。他们的笑，一定是最伤人的吧，珊莎心想。她眼看着这名英勇的老人面红耳赤地站在原地，满脸羞愧神色，气得说不出话来。最后，他抽出佩剑。
“Idle talk,” said Varys the eunuch. “Without meaning …”
珊莎听见在场惊声四起，柏洛斯爵士和马林爵士连忙上前与之对峙，然而巴利斯坦爵士只一个极轻蔑的眼神，便令他们两人冻结在地。“两位爵士先生，毋需害怕，你们的国王是安全的……但这可不是因为你们护驾有功。即便现在，我依旧可以像切乳酪一样把你们五个通通砍倒。假如你们打算服侍弑君者，那么你们通通不配穿这身白袍。”他把剑朝铁王座底一掷。“小鬼，拿去罢。要不要熔了这把剑，让王座上再多一把，随你高兴。那样的话，对你的助益还要强过这五人手中的剑。而等史坦尼斯大人拿下你的王位后，或许也能坐在这把上面。”
“He could be making plots with my uncles. I want him seized and questioned.” No one moved. Joffrey raised his voice. “I said, I want him seized!”
他绕远路离开，脚步踩在地板上，声响宏亮，回音在光秃秃的石墙间回荡。贵族男女站开让他通过，直等侍从关上了那两扇巨大的橡木青铜门，珊莎才又听见话音：有轻声细语，有不安地脚步，还有议事桌上纸张的挪动。“他竟然叫我‘小鬼’，”乔佛里愤恨地说，听起来比他的实际年龄更显孩子气。“他还说了我叔叔史坦尼斯的事。”
Janos Slynt rose from the council table. “My gold cloaks will see to it, Your Grace.”
“随口说说罢了，”太监瓦里斯道，“不是认真的……”
“Good,” said King Joffrey. Lord Janos strode from the hall, his ugly sons double-stepping to keep up as they lugged the great metal shield with the arms of House Slynt.
“他搞不好和我两个叔叔串通谋反。我要把他抓起来，好好审问。”无人动作。乔佛里提高声音，“我说了，我要把他抓起来！”
“Your Grace,” Littlefinger reminded the king. “If we might resume, the seven are now six. We find ourselves in need of a new sword for your Kingsguard.”
杰诺斯·史林特从议事桌边站起来。“陛下，此事就交给我手下的金袍卫士去办。”
Joffrey smiled. “Tell them, Mother.”
“很好。”乔佛里国王道。杰诺斯伯爵走出大厅，他的两个丑儿子急忙跟上，一边拖着刻了史林特家徽的金属巨盾。
“The king and council have determined that no man in the Seven Kingdoms is more fit to guard and protect His Grace than his sworn shield, Sandor Clegane.”
“陛下，”小指头提醒国王。“我们可以继续议程。原本的七铁卫如今只剩六人，我们需要为御林铁卫再添一名生力军。”
“How do you like that, dog?” King Joffrey asked.
乔佛里面露微笑。“母亲，告诉他们吧。”
The Hound’s scarred face was hard to read. He took a long moment to consider. “Why not? I have no lands nor wife to forsake, and who’d care if I did?” The burned side of his mouth twisted. “But I warn you, I’ll say no knight’s vows.”
“国王陛下和御前会议认为，放眼七大王国，无人能比宣誓守护陛下的贴身侍卫——桑铎·克里冈更适合担任此一职务。”
“The Sworn Brothers of the Kingsguard have always been knights,” Ser Boros said firmly.
“好狗，你觉得怎么样啊？”乔佛里国王问。
“Until now,” the Hound said in his deep rasp, and Ser Boros fell silent.
猎狗满是伤疤的脸瞧不出任何表情，他思考了很长一段时间。“有何不可？我无需抛弃封地或老婆，因为我根本就没有。就算我有，又有谁会在乎呢？”他被灼伤的半边嘴唇抽搐了一下。“但我警告你，我可不来骑士宣誓那一套。”
When the king’s herald moved forward, Sansa realized the moment was almost at hand. She smoothed down the cloth of her skirt nervously. She was dressed in mourning, as a sign of respect for the dead king, but she had taken special care to make herself beautiful. Her gown was the ivory silk that the queen had given her, the one Arya had ruined, but she’d had them dye it black and you couldn’t see the stain at all. She had fretted over her jewelry for hours and finally decided upon the elegant simplicity of a plain silver chain.
“御林铁卫的弟兄向来由骑士担任。”柏洛斯爵士口气坚定地说。
The herald’s voice boomed out. “If any man in this hall has other matters to set before His Grace, let him speak now or go forth and hold his silence.”
“从今天起，不再是了。”猎狗用一贯的喑哑声音道，柏洛斯爵士便不再作声。
Sansa quailed. Now , she told herself, I must do it now. Gods give me courage . She took one step, then another. Lords and knights stepped aside silently to let her pass, and she felt the weight of their eyes on her. I must be as strong as my lady mother . “Your Grace,” she called out in a soft, tremulous voice.
当司仪向前走去时，珊莎明白时机就快到了。她紧张地整整裙子。她虽穿着丧服，以表示对死去国王的敬意，但还是特别打扮过。她的礼服是太后送她的象牙色丝衣，就是被艾莉亚弄脏的那件，但她将之染成黑色，已经看不出上面的污渍。至于该配戴何种珠宝，她可是害怕地思索良久，最后才决定选择式样简单却不失优雅的银项链。
The height of the Iron Throne gave Joffrey a better vantage point than anyone else in the hall. He was the first to see her. “Come forward, my lady,” he called out, smiling.
司仪声音宏亮：“陛下倾听在场诸位的请愿，有事禀报，无事退朝。”
His smile emboldened her, made her feel beautiful and strong. He does love me, he does . Sansa lifted her head and walked toward him, not too slow and not too fast. She must not let them see how nervous she was.
珊莎害怕得浑身发抖。就是现在，她告诉自己，我必须现在去做，愿天上诸神赐予我勇气。她跨出一步，再跨一步。贵族和骑士静静地为她让路，她感觉到众人的视线在自己身上的重量。我必须像母亲大人一样坚强。“国王陛下。”她用细微的、颤抖的声音喊。
“The Lady Sansa, of House Stark,” the herald cried.
由于铁王座高出地面许多，所以乔佛里的视线较在场其他人清楚，他最先看到她。“小姐，请您上前来。”他面带微笑地召唤。
She stopped under the throne, at the spot where Ser Barristan’s white cloak lay puddled on the floor beside his helm and breastplate. “Do you have some business for king and council, Sansa?” the queen asked from the council table.
他的微笑给了她勇气，令她觉得自己美丽而坚强。他真的爱我，真的。珊莎抬起头，不疾不徐地朝他走去，她绝不能让他们察觉自己有多紧张。
“I do.” She knelt on the cloak, so as not to spoil her gown, and looked up at her prince on his fearsome black throne. “As it please Your Grace, I ask mercy for my father, Lord Eddard Stark, who was the Hand of the King.” She had practiced the words a hundred times.
“史塔克家族的珊莎小姐。”司仪高唱。
The queen sighed. “Sansa, you disappoint me. What did I tell you about traitor’s blood?”
她在王座下方停住脚步，正好站在巴利斯坦爵士的白披风、头盔和胸甲堆放的地方。“珊莎，你有事禀报国王陛下和御前会议？”议事桌边的太后问。
“Your father has committed grave and terrible crimes, my lady,” Grand Maester Pycelle intoned.
“是。”她跪在披风上，如此才不至于弄脏礼服。然后她抬头看着端坐恐怖黑王座上的白马王子。“启禀陛下，我要为家父，亦即前首相艾德·史塔克大人请愿，求您慈悲为怀、法外开恩。”这句话她已经练习过几百遍了。
“Ah, poor sad thing,” sighed Varys. “She is only a babe, my lords, she does not know what she asks.”
太后叹道：“珊莎，你太令我失望了。我是怎么跟你说叛国者的血统来着？”
Sansa had eyes only for Joffrey. He must listen to me, he must , she thought. The king shifted on his seat. “Let her speak,” he commanded. “I want to hear what she says.”
“小姐，您的父亲可是犯下了滔天大罪啊。”派席尔大学士沉吟道。
“Thank you, Your Grace.” Sansa smiled, a shy secret smile, just for him. He was listening. She knew he would.
“唉，可怜的小东西。”瓦里斯也跟着叹气，“诸位大人，她不过是个孩子，根本不知道自己要求的是什么。”
“Treason is a noxious weed,” Pycelle declared solemnly. “It must be torn up, root and stem and seed, lest new traitors sprout from every roadside.”
但珊莎只把目光放在乔佛里身上。他一定要听我说完，一定要啊，她心想。国王在宝座上动了动身子。“让她说吧，”他下令，“我要听听她的话。”
“Do you deny your father’s crime?” Lord Baelish asked.
“感谢您，陛下。”珊莎露出微笑。那是个羞怯的、私密的、只给他看的微笑。他真的愿意听，她就知道他会。
“No, my lords.” Sansa knew better than that. “I know he must be punished. All I ask is mercy. I know my lord father must regret what he did. He was King Robert’s friend and he loved him, you all know he loved him. He never wanted to be Hand until the king asked him. They must have lied to him. Lord Renly or Lord Stannis or … or somebody , they must have lied, otherwise …”
“叛国大罪好似带毒的野草，”派席尔庄严地宣布，“必须连根拔除、斩尽杀绝，否则叛徒便会四处蔓生。”
King Joffrey leaned forward, hands grasping the arms of the throne. Broken sword points fanned out between his fingers. “He said I wasn’t the king. Why did he say that?”
“令尊所犯之罪行，你可否认？”贝里席伯爵问。
“His leg was broken,” Sansa replied eagerly. “It hurt ever so much, Maester Pycelle was giving him milk of the poppy, and they say that milk of the poppy fills your head with clouds. Otherwise he would never have said it.”
“诸位大人，我不否认。”珊莎有更好的办法。“我很清楚他必须接受制裁。我要求的只是网开一面，放他一条生路。家父必定已对其所作所为懊悔不已，他是劳勃国王生前密友，他是真心敬爱国王的，相信在座各位都很明白。他从未有过成为御前首相的念头，直到国王开口。他必定是被蓝礼大人、史坦尼斯大人或……或某些人蛊惑，否则不会……”
Varys said, “A child’s faith … such sweet innocence … and yet, they say wisdom oft comes from the mouths of babes.”
乔佛里国王倾身向前，双手按紧王座扶手，断剑自他指缝根根穿出，有如铁扇。“他说我不是国王，他为什么要那样说？”
“Treason is treason,” Pycelle replied at once.
“他有腿伤在身，”珊莎急切地应道，“疼痛异常，派席尔大学士给他服用了罂粟花奶，而罂粟花奶会让人神智不清，否则他是绝不会这样说的。”
Joffrey rocked restlessly on the throne. “Mother?”
瓦里斯道：“这是孩子对父亲的信心所致……多么单纯而天真……可是呢，人们不是常说智慧往往来自孩童口中么？”
Cersei Lannister considered Sansa thoughtfully. “If Lord Eddard were to confess his crime,” she said at last, “we would know he had repented his folly.”
“但叛国就是叛国。”派席尔立刻回应。
Joffrey pushed himself to his feet. Please , Sansa thought, please, please, be the king I know you are, good and kind and noble, please . “Do you have any more to say?” he asked her.
乔佛里不安地在王位上动来动去。“母亲，您的意思呢？”
“Only … that as you love me, you do me this kindness, my prince,” Sansa said.
瑟曦·兰尼斯特满腹思量地审视珊莎。“倘若艾德大人愿意坦承罪行，”良久，她终于开口，“我们便可确知他已有悔悟之心。”
King Joffrey looked her up and down. “Your sweet words have moved me,” he said gallantly, nodding, as if to say all would be well. “I shall do as you ask … but first your father has to confess. He has to confess and say that I’m the king, or there will be no mercy for him.”
乔佛里站了起来。求求您，珊莎心想，求求您，求求您，您是我心中的国王，是那个仁慈高贵又好心肠的国王，求求您啊。“你还有什么要说的吗？”他问她。
“He will,” Sansa said, heart soaring. “Oh, I know he will.”
“请您……请您看在您爱我的份上，成全我这个心愿吧，我的王子。”珊莎说。
*EDDARD
乔佛里国王上上下下地打量着她。“你的一番肺腑之言感动了我，”他英勇地点头道，仿佛在说一切都会没事。“我就成全你……但你父亲必须先俯首认罪，承认我是他的国王，不然我无法手下留情。”
T he straw on the floor stank of urine. There was no window, no bed, not even a slop bucket. He remembered walls of pale red stone festooned with patches of nitre, a grey door of splintered wood, four inches thick and studded with iron. He had seen them, briefly, a quick glimpse as they shoved him inside. Once the door had slammed shut, he had seen no more. The dark was absolute. He had as well been blind.
“他会的，”珊莎说，整颗心都飞了起来。“嗯，我知道他会的。”
Or dead. Buried with his king. “Ah, Robert,” he murmured as his groping hand touched a cold stone wall, his leg throbbing with every motion. He remembered the jest the king had shared in the crypts of Winterfell, as the Kings of Winter looked on with cold stone eyes. The king eats , Robert had said, and the Hand takes the shit . How he had laughed. Yet he had gotten it wrong. The king dies , Ned Stark thought, and the Hand is buried .
第五十九章 艾德
The dungeon was under the Red Keep, deeper than he dared imagine. He remembered the old stories about Maegor the Cruel, who murdered all the masons who labored on his castle, so they might never reveal its secrets.
铺在地板的稻草充满尿臊昧。这里没有窗户，没有床，连个潲水桶都没有。他依稀记得墙壁是淡红色的，露出一片片硝石，有一扇碎木做的灰门，足有四尺厚，上面钉了铁钉。他被推进来时，短暂地看了屋内几眼，等门“轰”地一声关上，就什么也看不清了。这里没有一丝光线，他和瞎子无异。
He damned them all: Littlefinger, Janos Slynt and his gold cloaks, the queen, the Kingslayer, Pycelle and Varys and Ser Barristan, even Lord Renly, Robert’s own blood, who had run when he was needed most. Yet in the end he blamed himself. “Fool,” he cried to the darkness, “thrice-damned blind fool.”
或者说，和死人无异。他和他的国王一同被埋在地底了。“啊，劳勃。”他喃喃说，探出手去，摸到冰冷的石墙，每动一下，受伤的脚就抽痛一次。他回忆起当时在临冬城的地下墓窖里，在历代冬境之王雕像的冷冷石眼注视下，国王所说的笑话。国王吃席，劳勃这么说，首相拉屎。那时他笑得好不开心哪，只可惜他弄错了。应该是国王一死，奈德·史塔克心想，首相陪葬。
Cersei Lannister’s face seemed to float before him in the darkness. Her hair was full of sunlight, but there was mockery in her smile. “When you play the game of thrones, you win or you die,” she whispered. Ned had played and lost, and his men had paid the price of his folly with their life’s blood.
地牢位于红堡之下，到底有多深，他不敢去想。他想起与“残酷的”梅葛有关的那些故事，传说所有为他建筑城堡的工匠都遭他谋害，如此一来他们便永不能泄露其中秘密。
When he thought of his daughters, he would have wept gladly, but the tears would not come. Even now, he was a Stark of Winterfell, and his grief and his rage froze hard inside him.
他诅咒他们每个人小指头、杰诺·史林特和他的金袍卫队、王后、弑君者、派席尔、瓦里斯和巴利斯坦爵士，甚至劳勃的亲弟弟蓝礼公爵，因为他在自己最需要他的时候逃之夭夭。然而到了最后，他责怪的是自己。“蠢才！”他对着黑暗大喊，“你这个天杀的蠢才！”
When he kept very still, his leg did not hurt so much, so he did his best to lie unmoving. For how long he could not say. There was no sun and no moon. He could not see to mark the walls. Ned closed his eyes and opened them; it made no difference. He slept and woke and slept again. He did not know which was more painful, the waking or the sleeping. When he slept, he dreamed: dark disturbing dreams of blood and broken promises. When he woke, there was nothing to do but think, and his waking thoughts were worse than nightmares. The thought of Cat was as painful as a bed of nettles. He wondered where she was, what she was doing. He wondered whether he would ever see her again.
瑟曦·兰尼斯特的脸庞在黑暗中浮现眼前。她的秀发宛若阳光，微笑中带着嘲弄。“在权力的游戏之中，你不当赢家，就只有死路一条。”她悄声说。奈德输了这场游戏，他的部属以鲜血和生命为他的愚蠢付出了代价。
Hours turned to days, or so it seemed. He could feel a dull ache in his shattered leg, an itch beneath the plaster. When he touched his thigh, the flesh was hot to his fingers. The only sound was his breathing. After a time, he began to talk aloud, just to hear a voice. He made plans to keep himself sane, built castles of hope in the dark. Robert’s brothers were out in the world, raising armies at Dragonstone and Storm’s End. Alyn and Harwin would return to King’s Landing with the rest of his household guard once they had dealt with Ser Gregor. Catelyn would raise the north when the word reached her, and the lords of river and mountain and Vale would join her.
思及两个女儿，他只想放声痛哭一场，可眼泪却硬是掉不下来。纵然到了这步田地，他依旧是个临冬城的史塔克，他的悲伤和狂怒都冻结在体内。
He found himself thinking of Robert more and more. He saw the king as he had been in the flower of his youth, tall and handsome, his great antlered helm on his head, his warhammer in hand, sitting his horse like a horned god. He heard his laughter in the dark, saw his eyes, blue and clear as mountain lakes. “Look at us, Ned,” Robert said. “Gods, how did we come to this? You here, and me killed by a pig. We won a throne together …”
假如他安静不动，伤腿便不至于痛得太厉害，于是他尽可能地躺着不动。究竟躺了多久，他说不准。这里没有日升月落，什么也看不见，连在墙上做记号都不行。睁眼还是闭眼，一切都无分别。他睡了又醒，醒了又睡，不知睡着和醒来哪一个比较痛苦。睡着的时候会做梦，黑暗的、扰人的梦，充斥着血光以及不能遵守的约定；醒来的时候，除了思考，无事可做，然而他心中所想却比噩梦还可怕。想起凯特，有如躺在荨麻编成的床上那般苦痛。他幻想着此时此刻她置身何处，正在做些什么，却不知此生是否还能与她重逢。
I failed you, Robert , Ned thought. He could not say the words. I lied to you, hid the truth. I let them kill you .
时间流逝，日子一天天过去，至少感觉起来是这样。石膏下的断腿隐隐作痛，开始发痒。他碰碰大腿，热得发烫。这里惟一的声音，是他的呼吸。时间一久，他开始大声说话，只为了能听见声音。他拟订计划，决心保持神智清醒，在黑暗中筑起希望的城堡。劳勃的两位弟弟安然无恙，此刻正在龙石岛和风息堡整军待发。埃林和哈尔温一旦解决格雷果爵士，便将率领他其余的卫士返回君临。而凯特琳一旦接获消息，便会号召北方诸侯揭竿而起，而三河流域和艾林谷的贵族都会与她并肩作战。
The king heard him. “You stiff-necked fool,” he muttered, “too proud to listen. Can you eat pride, Stark? Will honor shield your children?” Cracks ran down his face, fissures opening in the flesh, and he reached up and ripped the mask away. It was not Robert at all; it was Littlefinger, grinning, mocking him. When he opened his mouth to speak, his lies turned to pale grey moths and took wing.
他发现自己不断想起劳勃，一次又一次。他看到青春年少的国王，高大英俊，头戴鹿盔，手持战锤，骑在马上宛如长角巨神。黑暗中他听见他的笑声，望着他那对碧蓝澄澈宛如山中湖泊的眼睛。“奈德，你看看我们，”劳勃说，“诸神在上，我们怎会落到这步田地？你被关在这儿，我死在一头猪脚下。当初我们可是一起打下江山，赢得王位……”
Ned was half-asleep when the footsteps came down the hall. At first he thought he dreamt them; it had been so long since he had heard anything but the sound of his own voice. Ned was feverish by then, his leg a dull agony, his lips parched and cracked. When the heavy wooden door creaked open, the sudden light was painful to his eyes.
劳勃，我对不起你，奈德心想，但他实在说不出口，我欺骗了你，隐瞒了真相，让他们害死了你。
A gaoler thrust a jug at him. The clay was cool and beaded with moisture. Ned grasped it with both hands and gulped eagerly. Water ran from his mouth and dripped down through his beard. He drank until he thought he would be sick. “How long …?” he asked weakly when he could drink no more.
但国王还是听到了。“你这个硬脖子的蠢蛋，”他喃喃道，“心高气傲，就是不肯听话。史塔克，自尊心能拿来吃吗？荣誉感能保护你的孩子吗？”他的脸一块块剥落，皮肤出现裂口，接着他伸手扯下面具。原来那根本不是劳勃，而是嘿嘿直笑、嘲弄着他的小指头。他张口想说话，但他的谎言变成灰白的蛾，拍拍翅膀飞走了。
The gaoler was a scarecrow of a man with a rat’s face and frayed beard, clad in a mail shirt and a leather half cape. “No talking,” he said as he wrenched the jug from Ned’s hands.
脚步声从走廊上传来时，奈德正在半睡半醒之间，起初还以为是自己作梦，因为除了自言自语，他已经太久没听见别的声音。他发着高烧，嘴唇干裂，腿伤隐隐作痛。沉重的木门“咿呀”一声打开时，突如其来的光线刺痛了他的眼睛。
“Please,” Ned said, “my daughters …” The door crashed shut. He blinked as the light vanished, lowered his head to his chest, and curled up on the straw. It no longer stank of urine and shit. It no longer smelled at all.
一名狱卒丢了个罐子给他。陶罐很凉，表面密布水珠。奈德双手紧紧捧住，饥渴地大口吞咽。水从嘴角流下，滴进胡子里。他一直喝到不适方才停下。“过了多久……？”他虚弱地问。
He could no longer tell the difference between waking and sleeping. The memory came creeping upon him in the darkness, as vivid as a dream. It was the year of false spring, and he was eighteen again, down from the Eyrie to the tourney at Harrenhal. He could see the deep green of the grass, and smell the pollen on the wind. Warm days and cool nights and the sweet taste of wine. He remembered Brandon’s laughter, and Robert’s berserk valor in the melee, the way he laughed as he unhorsed men left and right. He remembered Jaime Lannister, a golden youth in scaled white armor, kneeling on the grass in front of the king’s pavilion and making his vows to protect and defend King Aerys. Afterward, Ser Os well Whent helped Jaime to his feet, and the White Bull himself, Lord Commander Ser Gerold Hightower, fastened the snowy cloak of the Kingsguard about his shoulders. All six White Swords were there to welcome their newest brother.
狱卒瘦得像个稻草人，生着一张老鼠脸，胡子割得长短不齐。他穿了一件甲衣，外罩半身皮革斗篷。“不准说话。”说着他把水罐从奈德手里夺走。
Yet when the jousting began, the day belonged to Rhaegar Targaryen. The crown prince wore the armor he would die in: gleaming black plate with the three-headed dragon of his House wrought in rubies on the breast. A plume of scarlet silk streamed behind him when he rode, and it seemed no lance could touch him. Brandon fell to him, and Bronze Yohn Royce, and even the splendid Ser Arthur Dayne, the Sword of the Morning.
“求求你，”奈德说，“我的女儿……”大门轰地关上，光线倏然消失。他眨眨眼，低下头，蜷缩在稻草上。稻草闻起来不再有尿水和粪便的味道，闻起来一点味道都没有了。
Robert had been jesting with Jon and old Lord Hunter as the prince circled the field after unhorsing Ser Barristan in the final tilt to claim the champion’s crown. Ned remembered the moment when all the smiles died, when Prince Rhaegar Targaryen urged his horse past his own wife, the Dornish princess Elia Martell, to lay the queen of beauty’s laurel in Lyanna’s lap. He could see it still: a crown of winter roses, blue as frost.
他再也分不出睡着与醒来的差别。黑暗中，回忆悄然袭上心头，栩栩如生宛如幻境。那一年是“错误的春天”，他又回到了十八岁，陪着琼恩和劳勃从鹰巢城下山，远赴赫伦堡参加比武大会。他见到绿草长青，闻到风中花粉。温暖的白昼，凉爽的夜晚，甜美的酒香。他记得布兰登的笑，记得劳勃在团体比武中的狂暴威猛，记得他一边左劈右砍，将对手一个个击落马下，一边哈哈大笑的模样。他也记得身穿白色鳞甲的金发少年詹姆·兰尼斯特，跪在国王帐前的草地上，宣誓守护伊里斯国王。宣誓完毕之后，奥斯威尔·河安爵士扶詹姆起身，铁卫队长“白牛”杰洛·海塔尔爵士亲自为他系上御林铁卫的雪白披风。六位白骑士通通到场，欢迎他们新加入的弟兄。
Ned Stark reached out his hand to grasp the flowery crown, but beneath the pale blue petals the thorns lay hidden. He felt them clawing at his skin, sharp and cruel, saw the slow trickle of blood run down his fingers, and woke, trembling, in the dark.
比武会持续了十日，但在关键的马上长枪比武中，只有雷加·坦格利安抢尽了风头。当年王太子身上所穿的盔甲与他日后战死那天无异：闪闪发光的黑铠，胸前是红宝石镶成的三头龙，正是他的家徽。他骑马奔驰，一条鲜红丝带在背后流动，没有长枪能碰他分毫。布兰登被他刺落马下，青铜约恩·罗伊斯亦然，就连“拂晓神剑”亚瑟·戴恩爵士也不例外。
Promise me, Ned , his sister had whispered from her bed of blood. She had loved the scent of winter roses.
当王太子在决胜战中击倒巴利斯坦爵士，绕场一周，准备接下优胜宝冠时，劳勃正与琼恩和老杭特伯爵作最后的拼斗。奈德记得雷加·坦格利安催马跑过自己的妻子——多恩领马泰尔家族的伊莉亚公主，将爱与美的皇后的桂冠放在莱安娜膝上。全场观众笑容消失的那一刻，至今依然历历在目，那是一顶冬雪玫瑰编织而成的皇冠，碧蓝如霜。
“Gods save me,” Ned wept. “I am going mad.”
奈德·史塔克伸手去抓那项花冠，但浅蓝色的花瓣底下却暗藏着剌。尖利残酷的刺撕扯皮肤，他看着鲜血缓缓流下手指。骤然惊醒，四周一片黑暗。
The gods did not deign to answer.
奈德，答应我，躺卧血床的妹妹朝他低语。她生前最爱冬雪玫瑰的芳香。
Each time the turnkey brought him water, he told himself another day had passed. At first he would beg the man for some word of his daughters and the world beyond his cell. Grunts and kicks were his only replies. Later, when the stomach cramps began, he begged for food instead. It made no matter; he was not fed. Perhaps the Lannisters meant for him to starve to death. “No,” he told himself. If Cersei had wanted him dead, he would have been cut down in the throne room with his men. She wanted him alive. Weak, desperate, yet alive. Catelyn held her brother; she dare not kill him or the Imp’s life would be forfeit as well.
“诸神救我，”奈德泣不成声。“我要疯了。”
From outside his cell came the rattle of iron chains. As the door creaked open, Ned put a hand to the damp wall and pushed himself toward the light. The glare of a torch made him squint. “Food,” he croaked.
天上诸神没有回应。
“Wine,” a voice answered. It was not the rat-faced man; this gaoler was stouter, shorter, though he wore the same leather half cape and spiked steel cap. “Drink, Lord Eddard.” He thrust a wineskin into Ned’s hands.
每当狱卒带水给他喝，他就告诉自己又过了一天。起初他还拜托来人，请他说说女儿的消息，以及外面发生了什么，但咕哝和脚踢是惟一的回答。几“天”后，他肚子抽筋，便改向狱卒求恳食物，结果还是相同，他依然没东西吃。或许兰尼斯特家打算把他生生饿死。“不对。”他对自己说。倘若瑟曦要置他于死地，他早就和部下一起被砍倒在王座厅了。她要他活着，不论如何虚弱，如何绝望，都要留下他一条命。凯特琳手上还握有她的弟弟；她若是杀他，那么小恶魔也会没命。
The voice was strangely familiar, yet it took Ned Stark a moment to place it. “Varys?” he said groggily when it came. He touched the man’s face. “I’m not … not dreaming this. You’re here.” The eunuch’s plump cheeks were covered with a dark stubble of beard. Ned felt the coarse hair with his fingers. Varys had transformed himself into a grizzled turnkey, reeking of sweat and sour wine. “How did you … what sort of magician are you?”
囚室外传来铁链碰撞的声音。门突然打开，奈德伸手撑住潮湿的墙壁，往光明的地方爬去。火炬的强光刺得他眯起眼睛。“食物，”他哑着嗓子说。
“A thirsty one,” Varys said. “Drink, my lord.”
“我带了酒来，”一个声音应道。不是那个老鼠脸；这次的狱卒比较矮胖，但同样穿着半身皮斗篷，戴了有刺钢盔。“艾德大人，您快喝吧。”他将一个酒袋塞进奈德手里。
Ned’s hands fumbled at the skin. “Is this the same poison they gave Robert?”
这声音出奇地熟悉，但奈德·史塔克过了一阵子才想起来。“瓦里斯？”他虚弱不堪地说，伸手摸摸对方的脸。“我……我不是在作梦。真的是你。”太监肥胖的脸颊上覆盖着粗短的黑胡茬，奈德的手指感觉到它们的粗糙。瓦里斯把自己变成了大胡子狱卒，浑身上下散发着汗臭和劣酒的气味。“你是怎么……你到底是个什么样的魔术师？”
“You wrong me,” Varys said sadly. “Truly, no one loves a eunuch. Give me the skin.” He drank, a trickle of red leaking from the corner of his plump mouth. “Not the equal of the vintage you offered me the night of the tourney, but no more poisonous than most,” he concluded, wiping his lips. “Here.”
“口很渴的魔术师。”瓦里斯道，“大人，快喝吧。”
Ned tried a swallow. “Dregs.” He felt as though he were about to bring the wine back up.
奈德的手慌乱地捧着酒袋。“他们给劳勃喝的，就是这种毒药么？”
“All men must swallow the sour with the sweet. High lords and eunuchs alike. Your hour has come, my lord.”
“您错怪我了，”瓦里斯哀伤地说，“果真是没人喜欢太监啊。酒袋给我。”他喝了几口，红色的酒液从他肥厚的嘴角流淌下来。“这虽然不能和比武大会当晚您请我喝的酒相提并论，但也绝非毒药。”他抹抹嘴下了结论。“来。”
“My daughters …”
奈德试着啜下一口。“这是酒糟。”他觉得自己快吐出来了。
“The younger girl escaped Ser Meryn and fled,” Varys told him. “I have not been able to find her. Nor have the Lannisters. A kindness, there. Our new king loves her not. Your older girl is still betrothed to Joffrey. Cersei keeps her close. She came to court a few days ago to plead that you be spared. A pity you couldn’t have been there, you would have been touched.” He leaned forward intently. “I trust you realize that you are a dead man, Lord Eddard?”
“是啊，不管你是王公贵族还是太监走卒，酸的甜的都得学着吞。大人，您的时辰近了。”
“The queen will not kill me,” Ned said. His head swam; the wine was strong, and it had been too long since he’d eaten. “Cat … Cat holds her brother …”
“我女儿们……”
“The wrong brother,” Varys sighed. “And lost to her, in any case. She let the Imp slip through her fingers. I expect he is dead by now, somewhere in the Mountains of the Moon.”
“您的小女儿从马林爵士手边逃脱了，”瓦里斯告诉他，“我到现在都没能找到她，兰尼斯特的人也找不到，这多少算是诸神慈悲罢，因为我们的新国王并不爱她。您的大女儿依然是乔佛里的未婚妻，瑟曦把她留在身边，她几天前刚上朝为您求情。只可惜您不在场，否则一定会大受感动。”他意图昭昭地往前靠。“艾德大人，想必您知道自己在劫难逃吧？”
“If that is true, slit my throat and have done with it.” He was dizzy from the wine, tired and heartsick.
“王后不会杀我，”奈德说。他开始头晕目眩；这酒太烈，他又太久没有进食。“凯特……凯特手里有她弟弟……”
“Your blood is the last thing I desire.”
“但不是她爱的弟弟，”瓦里斯叹道，“而且这会儿也跑了。显然是她让小恶魔从手里钻了出去。我看他现在多半已经死在明月山脉里某个不知名的地方了吧。”
Ned frowned. “When they slaughtered my guard, you stood beside the queen and watched, and said not a word.”
“倘若真是这样，那快快割了我喉咙，做个了结。”酒劲上涌，他身心俱疲，头脑昏沉。
“And would again. I seem to recall that I was unarmed, unarmored, and surrounded by Lannister swords.” The eunuch looked at him curiously, tilting his head. “When I was a young boy, before I was cut, I traveled with a troupe of mummers through the Free Cities. They taught me that each man has a role to play, in life as well as mummery. So it is at court. The King’s Justice must be fearsome, the master of coin must be frugal, the Lord Commander of the Kingsguard must be valiant … and the master of whisperers must be sly and obsequious and without scruple. A courageous informer would be as useless as a cowardly knight.” He took the wineskin back and drank.
“我对您的血一点兴趣都没有。”
Ned studied the eunuch’s face, searching for truth beneath the mummer’s scars and false stubble. He tried some more wine. This time it went down easier. “Can you free me from this pit?”
奈德皱眉：“当他们屠杀我的手下时，你可是站在王后身边袖手旁观，一声不吭。”
“I could … but will I? No. Questions would be asked, and the answers would lead back to me.”
“换做是现在，我还是会那么做。我记得自己当时不但手无寸铁，没盔没甲，还被兰尼斯特的武士团团围住。”太监歪着头，好奇地打量他。“我小时候，还没被割之前，曾跟戏班子在自由贸易城邦巡回演出。他们教会我一件事，那就是每个人都有自己该扮演的角色，戏里戏外都一样。朝廷里也是如此，所以御前执法官必须模样凶神恶煞，财政大臣要勤俭成性，御林铁卫队长则需勇武过人……而情报总管呢，当然应该诡计多端、擅长逢迎拍捧、行事无孔不入。而一个勇气十足的情报头子，就和一个懦弱胆小的骑士一样没用。”
Ned had expected no more. “You are blunt.”
奈德审视着太监的脸，搜寻他的假疤痕和假胡子下的真相。他又试着喝了点酒，这回顺口多了。“你能把我从这地穴救出去吗？”
“A eunuch has no honor, and a spider does not enjoy the luxury of scruples, my lord.”
“我能……但我要不要这么做呢？当然不。到时候一定有人展开调查，而所有的线索都会指向我。”
“Would you at least consent to carry a message out for me?”
奈德原本也不期望他答应。“你还真是实话实说。”
“That would depend on the message. I will gladly provide you with paper and ink, if you like. And when you have written what you will, I will take the letter and read it, and deliver it or not, as best serves my own ends.”
“大人，太监没有荣誉，蜘蛛也没有行事顾及自尊的福分。”
“Your own ends. What ends are those, Lord Varys?”
“那你可否至少替我送封信？”
“Peace,” Varys replied without hesitation. “If there was one soul in King’s Landing who was truly desperate to keep Robert Baratheon alive, it was me.” He sighed. “For fifteen years I protected him from his enemies, but I could not protect him from his friends. What strange fit of madness led you to tell the queen that you had learned the truth of Joffrey’s birth?”
“得视信的内容而定。您要的话，我很乐意提供纸笔。等你写好之后，我会把信拿来读一遍，至于要不要送出去，则要看信是否合乎我个人目的了。”
“The madness of mercy,” Ned admitted.
“你的目的？瓦里斯大人，敢问您的目的又是什么？”
“Ah,” said Varys. “To be sure. You are an honest and honorable man, Lord Eddard. Ofttimes I forget that. I have met so few of them in my life.” He glanced around the cell. “When I see what honesty and honor have won you, I understand why.”
“和平。”瓦里斯毫不迟疑地回答，“假如说君临城里有哪个灵魂真心诚意想保住劳勃·拜拉席恩的性命，那便是我。”他叹了口气。“十五年来，我尽心竭力保护他免遭敌人伤害，到头来却免不了他为朋友所害。您脑筋里究竟是有些什么疯狂念头，让您跑去告诉太后，说您知道乔佛里的真实身份？”
Ned Stark laid his head back against the damp stone wall and closed his eyes. His leg was throbbing. “The king’s wine … did you question Lancel?”
“仁慈的疯狂念头。”奈德坦承。
“Oh, indeed. Cersei gave him the wineskins, and told him it was Robert’s favorite vintage.” The eunuch shrugged. “A hunter lives a perilous life. If the boar had not done for Robert, it would have been a fall from a horse, the bite of a wood adder, an arrow gone astray … the forest is the abbatoir of the gods. It was not wine that killed the king. It was your mercy.”
“啊，”瓦里斯道，“可不是么？艾德大人，您是个正直磊落的人，我常常忘记这点，因为我这辈子很少遇见您这样的人。”他环顾囚室四周。“当我见到诚实和荣誉给您带来何种下场之后，我终于明白这是为什么了。”
Ned had feared as much. “Gods forgive me.”
奈德·史塔克低头枕在潮湿的石墙上，闭上了眼睛。他的伤腿隐隐作痛。“国王喝的酒……你查问过蓝赛尔吗？”
“If there are gods,” Varys said, “I expect they will. The queen would not have waited long in any case. Robert was becoming unruly, and she needed to be rid of him to free her hands to deal with his brothers. They are quite a pair, Stannis and Renly. The iron gauntlet and the silk glove.” He wiped his mouth with the back of his hand. “You have been foolish, my lord. You ought to have heeded Littlefinger when he urged you to support Joffrey’s succession.”
“当然问了。酒袋是瑟曦给他的，还告诉他那是劳勃最喜欢的佳酿。”太监耸耸肩。“打猎本来就危险，纵使那头猪没杀死劳勃，他也会摔下马来，被毒蛇咬，或者是一枝射偏的箭……森林是天上诸神的屠宰场。但是，杀死国王的不是药酒，而是您的‘仁慈’。”
“How … how could you know of that?”
奈德就怕这个。“诸神饶恕我。”
Varys smiled. “I know, that’s all that need concern you. I also know that on the morrow the queen will pay you a visit.”
“假如世间真有神灵存在，”瓦里斯道，“我想他们不会苛责您的。反正瑟曦也不会等太久。劳勃越来越难驾驭，她必须先除掉他，才能放手对付他两个弟弟。史坦尼斯和蓝礼两个还真是一对，一个铁甲拳，一个丝手套。”他用手背抹抹嘴。“大人，您太蠢了，当初您应该听从小指头的建议，拥护乔佛里登基。”
Slowly Ned raised his eyes. “Why?”
“你……你怎么知道？”
“Cersei is frightened of you, my lord … but she has other enemies she fears even more. Her beloved Jaime is fighting the river lords even now. Lysa Arryn sits in the Eyrie, ringed in stone and steel, and there is no love lost between her and the queen. In Dorne, the Martells still brood on the murder of Princess Elia and her babes. And now your son marches down the Neck with a northern host at his back.”
瓦里斯微微一笑。“您只要知道我知道这件事就够了。我还知道太后明天会来拜访您。”
“Robb is only a boy,” Ned said, aghast.
奈德缓缓抬眼。“为什么？”
“A boy with an army,” Varys said. “Yet only a boy, as you say. The king’s brothers are the ones giving Cersei sleepless nights … Lord Stannis in particular. His claim is the true one, he is known for his prowess as a battle commander, and he is utterly without mercy. There is no creature on earth half so terrifying as a truly just man. No one knows what Stannis has been doing on Dragonstone, but I will wager you that he’s gathered more swords than seashells. So here is Cersei’s nightmare: while her father and brother spend their power battling Starks and Tullys, Lord Stannis will land, proclaim himself king, and lop off her son’s curly blond head … and her own in the bargain, though I truly believe she cares more about the boy.”
“大人，瑟曦虽然怕你……但她更怕别人。她亲爱的詹姆此刻正与河间贵族作战，莱莎·艾林高据鹰巢城，占有天险，兵力雄厚，而她和太后向来不睦。多恩领方面，马泰尔家族至今依旧对伊莉亚公主和她小婴儿的死怀恨在心。更何况这会儿令公子又带着北方诸侯大军越过颈泽往南来了。”
“Stannis Baratheon is Robert’s true heir,” Ned said. “The throne is his by rights. I would welcome his ascent.”
“罗柏只是个孩子。”奈德大惊失色。
Varys tsked . “Cersei will not want to hear that, I promise you. Stannis may win the throne, but only your rotting head will remain to cheer unless you guard that tongue of yours. Sansa begged so sweetly, it would be a shame if you threw it all away. You are being given your life back, if you’ll take it. Cersei is no fool. She knows a tame wolf is of more use than a dead one.”
“是个握有大军的孩子。”瓦里斯道，“不过如您所说，他毕竟只是个孩子。真正令瑟曦寝食难安的是国王的两个弟弟。……尤其是史坦尼斯大人。他的继承权名正言顺，本人又能征善战，而且绝不心软。这世上再没有谁比一个绝对刚正不阿的人更可怕。这段时间史坦尼斯在龙石岛做些什么，没有人知道，可我敢打赌，他是在招聚兵马，决非收集贝壳。所以啰，瑟曦怕的就是：当她的父亲和弟弟对付史塔克家和徒利家的时候，史坦尼斯趁机登陆，自立为王，并砍掉她儿子那个生了漂亮卷发的头……当然，她自己也难保性命，虽说我真的相信她比较在乎孩子。”
“You want me to serve the woman who murdered my king, butchered my men, and crippled my son?” Ned’s voice was thick with disbelief.
“史坦尼斯·拜拉席恩是劳勃真正的继承人，”奈德说，“王位本归他所有，我欢迎他登基为王。”
“I want you to serve the realm,” Varys said. “Tell the queen that you will confess your vile treason, command your son to lay down his sword, and proclaim Joffrey as the true heir. Offer to denounce Stannis and Renly as faithless usurpers. Our green-eyed lioness knows you are a man of honor. If you will give her the peace she needs and the time to deal with Stannis, and pledge to carry her secret to your grave, I believe she will allow you to take the black and live out the rest of your days on the Wall, with your brother and that baseborn son of yours.”
瓦里斯啐了一声。“我跟您保证，瑟曦可不想听到这句。史坦尼斯虽有可能夺得王位，但您要是不多管管自己的舌头，到时候恐怕就只剩一颗烂掉的头欢迎他了。珊莎那么努力地为您求情，若是不把握机会，实在太可惜。老实说，眼下只要您愿意，可以逃过一劫。瑟曦不笨，她知道驯服的狼比一条死狼有用得多。”
The thought of Jon filled Ned with a sense of shame, and a sorrow too deep for words. If only he could see the boy again, sit and talk with him … pain shot through his broken leg, beneath the filthy grey plaster of his cast. He winced, his fingers opening and closing helplessly. “Is this your own scheme,” he gasped out at Varys, “or are you in league with Littlefinger?”
“这女人谋害我的国王，屠杀我的部下，还把我儿子摔成残废，你竟然要我为她效力？”奈德难以置信。
That seemed to amuse the eunuch. “I would sooner wed the Black Goat of Qohor. Littlefinger is the second most devious man in the Seven Kingdoms. Oh, I feed him choice whispers, sufficient so that he thinks I am his … just as I allow Cersei to believe I am hers.”
“我要你为国家效力，”瓦里斯道，“您只需对太后承诺愿意坦白邪恶的叛国罪行，命令你儿子放下武器，尊乔佛里为真正的国王，并指称史坦尼斯和蓝礼是忘恩负义的叛逆，这样就行了。我们的碧眼母狮子知道您是个言行一致的人，只要您给她时间和力气对付史坦尼斯，并保证死也不说出她的秘密，那么我相信她会同意您穿上黑衣，在长城和您弟弟，还有您那私生子一起度过余生。”
“And just as you let me believe that you were mine. Tell me, Lord Varys, who do you truly serve?”
想到琼恩，奈德满怀羞耻，以及一种言词难以形容的深深哀恸。如果能再看看那孩子，坐下来和他好好谈心就好了……剧痛从断腿脏污的灰色石膏底下传来，他皱紧眉头，手指无助地又张又阖。“这是你的主意，”他喘着气对瓦里斯说，“还是你和小指头一起想出来的？”
Varys smiled thinly. “Why, the realm, my good lord, how ever could you doubt that? I swear it by my lost manhood. I serve the realm, and the realm needs peace.” He finished the last swallow of wine, and tossed the empty skin aside. “So what is your answer, Lord Eddard? Give me your word that you’ll tell the queen what she wants to hear when she comes calling.”
这话似乎令太监甚觉有趣。“要我跟他同伙，那我宁可娶一只科霍尔的黑羊。小指头是七国上下第二狡猾的人。哎，我是会给他挑一些有用的消息，刚好足以让他‘以为’我是他的人……就好像我让瑟曦也如此相信。”
“If I did, my word would be as hollow as an empty suit of armor. My life is not so precious to me as that.”
“就好像你让我也如此相信。瓦里斯大人，请您告诉我，您到底为谁效力？”
“Pity.” The eunuch stood. “And your daughter’s life, my lord? How precious is that?”
瓦里斯浅浅一笑。“唉，大人，这还用说吗？我当然是为国效力了。我以我失去的命根子发誓，我为国家效命，而国家需要的正是和平。”他喝完最后一口酒，把空酒袋丢到一边。“所以啰，艾德大人，您的回答是什么？请您向我保证，等太后到来时，您会说出她想听的话。”
A chill pierced Ned’s heart. “My daughter …”
“如果我作这种保证，那我的誓言与没人穿的空洞铠甲何异？我的命不至于珍贵到那种地步。”
“Surely you did not think I’d forgotten about your sweet innocent, my lord? The queen most certainly has not.”
“可惜。”太监起身。“那么大人，您女儿的性命呢？那又有多珍贵？”
“No,” Ned pleaded, his voice cracking. “Varys, gods have mercy, do as you like with me, but leave my daughter out of your schemes. Sansa’s no more than a child.”
一股寒意袭上奈德心头。“我女儿……”
“Rhaenys was a child too. Prince Rhaegar’s daughter. A precious little thing, younger than your girls. She had a small black kitten she called Balerion, did you know? I always wondered what happened to him. Rhaenys liked to pretend he was the true Balerion, the Black Dread of old, but I imagine the Lannisters taught her the difference between a kitten and a dragon quick enough, the day they broke down her door.” Varys gave a long weary sigh, the sigh of a man who carried all the sadness of the world in a sack upon his shoulders. “The High Septon once told me that as we sin, so do we suffer. If that’s true, Lord Eddard, tell me … why is it always the innocents who suffer most, when you high lords play your game of thrones? Ponder it, if you would, while you wait upon the queen. And spare a thought for this as well: The next visitor who calls on you could bring you bread and cheese and the milk of the poppy for your pain … or he could bring you Sansa’s head.
“大人，您总不会以为我忘记了您纯真的乖女儿呢？太后她可是绝对不会忘记。”
“The choice, my dear lord Hand, is entirely yours.”
“不要，”奈德哑着嗓子哀求。“瓦里斯，诸神慈悲，要杀要剐我任你处置，但别把我女儿牵扯进来。珊莎不过是个孩子。”
*CATELYN
“雷加王子的女儿雷妮丝公主不也是个孩子？她是个讨人喜欢的小宝贝，年纪比您两个女儿都要小。您可知道，她养了一只小黑猫，名叫贝勒里恩？到现在我始终不知道那只猫的下落。雷妮丝老爱把它当作真正的黑死神贝勒里恩。不过呢，我想在兰尼斯特军撞开她房门那天，他们很快就让她知道小猫和飞龙之间的差异了罢。”瓦里斯疲倦地一声长叹，仿佛肩负着全世界的哀伤。“总主教大人曾对我说，因为我们有罪，所以我们受苦。假如这是真的，艾德大人，请告诉我……为何在你们这些王公贵族的权力游戏里面，永远是无辜的人受苦最多？您愿意的话，就在王后到来之前，好好想一想罢。除此之外，更请您想清楚：下一个来探访您的人可能带着面包乳酪，以及减轻痛苦的罂粟花奶……却也可能带着珊莎的项上人头。”
A s the host trooped down the causeway through the black bogs of the Neck and spilled out into the riverlands beyond, Catelyn’s apprehensions grew. She masked her fears behind a face kept still and stern, yet they were there all the same, growing with every league they crossed. Her days were anxious, her nights restless, and every raven that flew overhead made her clench her teeth.
“要选哪一种呢，亲爱的首相大人，完完全全看您的决定了。”
She feared for her lord father, and wondered at his ominous silence. She feared for her brother Edmure, and prayed that the gods would watch over him if he must face the Kingslayer in battle. She feared for Ned and her girls, and for the sweet sons she had left behind at Winterfell. And yet there was nothing she could do for any of them, and so she made herself put all thought of them aside. You must save your strength for Robb , she told herself. He is the only one you can help. You must be as fierce and hard as the north, Catelyn Tully. You must be a Stark for true now, like your son .
第六十章 凯特琳
Robb rode at the front of the column, beneath the flapping white banner of Winterfell. Each day he would ask one of his lords to join him, so they might confer as they marched; he honored every man in turn, showing no favorites, listening as his lord father had listened, weighing the words of one against the other. He has learned so much from Ned , she thought as she watched him, but has he learned enough?
眼看部队沿堤道穿过颈泽的黑色沼地，涌进彼方的河间地区，凯特琳的忧虑与日俱增。虽然她将恐惧埋藏在沉着冷静的面具之下，但它依旧存在，并随着他们跨越的每一里格不断增长。白天她焦虑不安，晚上则辗转反侧，每一只飞过头顶的渡鸦，都令她不禁咬紧牙关。
The Blackfish had taken a hundred picked men and a hundred swift horses and raced ahead to screen their movements and scout the way. The reports Ser Brynden’s riders brought back did little to reassure her. Lord Tywin’s host was still many days to the south … but Walder Frey, Lord of the Crossing, had assembled a force of near four thousand men at his castles on the Green Fork.
她为父亲恐惧，对他的缄默大惑不解。她为弟弟艾德慕恐惧，并暗自祈求，倘若他必须与弑君者在战场上相见，请天上诸神务必看护他。她更为奈德和两个女儿，为那两个她丢在临冬城不管的乖儿子恐惧。然而，她对他们每一个人都无能为力，于是她逼迫自己将这些念头统统抛到脑后。你必须将力量留给罗柏，她这么对自己说，他是你惟一帮得上忙的人。凯特琳·徒利，现在的你，必须像北方一样坚毅刚强，必须成为一个名符其实的史塔克家人，像你的儿子一样。
“Late again,” Catelyn murmured when she heard. It was the Trident all over, damn the man. Her brother Edmure had called the banners; by rights, Lord Frey should have gone to join the Tully host at Riverrun, yet here he sat.
罗柏骑马走在队伍最前面，临冬城的白色旗帜在他头顶迎风飘扬。每天，他都会请一位封臣与他同行，借此机会讨论战略；他轮流邀请每一位诸侯，丝毫没有表现出个人好恶，像他的父亲一样用心聆听对方意见，仔细衡量每种说法。他从奈德那里学了好多，她看着他，心里想着，可他学够了吗？
“Four thousand men,” Robb repeated, more perplexed than angry. “Lord Frey cannot hope to fight the Lannisters by himself. Surely he means to join his power to ours.”
黑鱼精挑细选出一百个人和一百匹好马，当先到前方掩蔽他们的行踪，并执行侦察任务。而布林登爵士的部下回报的消息，丝毫未能纾解她的忧虑。泰温大人的部队虽与他们仍有相当距离……但河渡口领主瓦德·佛雷却已在他绿叉河畔的城堡聚集了近四千的兵力。
“Does he?” Catelyn asked. She had ridden forward to join Robb and Robett Glover, his companion of the day. The vanguard spread out behind them, a slow-moving forest of lances and banners and spears. “I wonder. Expect nothing of Walder Frey, and you will never be surprised.”
“又迟到了。”凯特琳得知消息时，不禁喃喃自语。这人真该遭天谴，眼下简直是当年三叉戟河之战的翻版。她的弟弟艾德慕既已召集封臣，照说佛雷侯爵早该率兵前往奔流城加入徒利大军，结果他却按兵不动。
“He’s your father’s bannerman.”
“四千人，”罗柏复诵了一遍，话中有些恼火，更有困惑。“佛雷大人绝不可能单独对付兰尼斯特军，所以他一定打算加入我们。”
“Some men take their oaths more seriously than others, Robb. And Lord Walder was always friendlier with Casterly Rock than my father would have liked. One of his sons is wed to Tywin Lannister’s sister. That means little of itself, to be sure. Lord Walder has sired a great many children over the years, and they must needs marry someone. Still …”
“是吗？”凯特琳反问。她骑到队伍前方，与罗柏和他今天的同伴罗贝特·葛洛佛同行。先锋军散开跟在他们身后，犹如一座由枪戟、旗帜和长矛组成的森林，缓缓移动。“我可不敢说。决不要对瓦德·佛雷抱任何期望，到时候你就不会觉得意外。”
“Do you think he means to betray us to the Lannisters, my lady?” Robett Glover asked gravely.
“可他是外公的封臣。”
Catelyn sighed. “If truth be told, I doubt even Lord Frey knows what Lord Frey intends to do. He has an old man’s caution and a young man’s ambition, and has never lacked for cunning.”
“罗柏，不是每个人都把自己立下的誓言当回事的，更何况瓦德大人与凯岩城的友好程度，向来令你外公不满。他有一个儿子就是娶了泰温·兰尼斯特的妹妹，虽说这算不了什么，瓦德大人膝下儿孙满堂，他们总是得结婚的。不过……”
“We must have the Twins, Mother,” Robb said heatedly. “There is no other way across the river. You know that.”
“夫人，您认为他打算把我们出卖给兰尼斯特？”罗贝特·葛洛佛语气沉重地问。
“Yes. And so does Walder Frey, you can be sure of that.”
凯特琳叹道：“说真的，我怀疑佛雷大人自己都不确定有何打算。他既有老人家的行事谨慎，又有年轻人的野心勃勃，更不缺精打细算。”
That night they made camp on the southern edge of the bogs, halfway between the kingsroad and the river. It was there Theon Greyjoy brought them further word from her uncle. “Ser Brynden says to tell you he’s crossed swords with the Lannisters. There are a dozen scouts who won’t be reporting back to Lord Tywin anytime soon. Or ever.” He grinned. “Ser Addam Marbrand commands their outriders, and he’s pulling back south, burning as he goes. He knows where we are, more or less, but the Blackfish vows he will not know when we split.”
“母亲，我们一定要得到孪河城的支持。”罗柏的口气有些冲，“你也知道，除此之外无处可以渡河。”
“Unless Lord Frey tells him,” Catelyn said sharply. “Theon, when you return to my uncle, tell him he is to place his best bowmen around the Twins, day and night, with orders to bring down any raven they see leaving the battlements. I want no birds bringing word of my son’s movements to Lord Tywin.”
“没错，而且你大可放心，瓦德·佛雷也很清楚。”
“Ser Brynden has seen to it already, my lady,” Theon replied with a cocky smile. “A few more blackbirds, and we should have enough to bake a pie. I’ll save you their feathers for a hat.”
当晚，他们在沼泽的南界扎营，正好在国王大道和河流中间。席恩·葛雷乔伊便是在此为他们带来她叔叔的新情报。“布林登爵士要我告诉你们，他已经和兰尼斯特军发生了遭遇战。有十来个斥候大概暂时不会回去跟泰温大人报告了，我看他们永远也回不去了。”他嘻嘻笑道，“负责指挥敌军侦察部队的是亚当·马尔布兰爵士，他正掉头往南，沿途到处放火。他约略知道我们的位置，但黑鱼发誓绝不让他知道我们何时兵分两路。”
She ought to have known that Brynden Blackfish would be well ahead of her. “What have the Freys been doing while the Lannisters burn their fields and plunder their holdfasts?”
“除非佛雷大人告诉他。”凯特琳语气尖锐，“席恩，你回去之后，请我叔叔将手下最厉害的弓箭手布置在孪河城四周，日夜监视，一旦有渡鸦出城，立刻将其射下，我不希望有任何飞鸟将我儿的动向报告给泰温大人。”
“There’s been some fighting between Ser Addam’s men and Lord Walder’s,” Theon answered. “Not a day’s ride from here, we found two Lannister scouts feeding the crows where the Freys had strung them up. Most of Lord Walder’s strength remains massed at the Twins, though.”
“夫人，布林登大人早已这么办了。”席恩带着一抹得意的笑容回答，“再多几只黑鸟，我们都可以拿来做馅饼了。我会把羽毛留下来给您做顶帽子的。”
That bore Walder Frey’s seal beyond a doubt, Catelyn thought bitterly; hold back, wait, watch, take no risk unless forced to it.
她早该想到，黑鱼布林登的考虑远比自己周详。“既然兰尼斯特军纵火焚烧佛雷家族的田地，掠夺他们的农舍，那他们有何反应？”
“If he’s been fighting the Lannisters, perhaps he does mean to hold to his vows,” Robb said.
“亚当爵士和瓦德大人双方的部队有过遭遇战，”席恩回答，“距此不到一日骑程，我们发现两个兰尼斯特斥候被佛雷家士兵绑起来喂乌鸦。当然，瓦德大人绝大多数兵力集结在孪河城。”
Catelyn was less encouraged. “Defending his own lands is one thing, open battle against Lord Tywin quite another.”
按兵不动，静观其变，不明动态，绝不出手，这真是瓦德·佛雷的不改作风，凯特琳苦涩地想。
Robb turned back to Theon Greyjoy. “Has the Blackfish found any other way across the Green Fork?”
“既然他已和兰尼斯特军开战，或许他的确有意遵守誓言。”罗柏道。
Theon shook his head. “The river’s running high and fast. Ser Brynden says it can’t be forded, not this far north.”
凯特琳可没那么乐观。“保护自己的领地是一回事，公然与泰温大人作战又是另一回事。”
“I must have that crossing!” Robb declared, fuming. “Oh, our horses might be able to swim the river, I suppose, but not with armored men on their backs. We’d need to build rafts to pole our steel across, helms and mail and lances, and we don’t have the trees for that. Or the time. Lord Tywin is marching north …” He balled his hand into a fist.
罗柏转头对席恩·葛雷乔伊说：“黑鱼有没有发现其他渡过绿叉河的方法？”
“Lord Frey would be a fool to try and bar our way,” Theon Greyjoy said with his customary easy confidence. “We have five times his numbers. You can take the Twins if you need to, Robb.”
席恩摇摇头。“现在水位很高，水流又湍急，布林登爵士说在这么上游的地方是不可能渡河的。”
“Not easily,” Catelyn warned them, “and not in time. While you were mounting your siege, Tywin Lannister would bring up his host and assault you from the rear.”
“我非渡河不可！”罗柏火冒三丈，“唉，我们的马或许可以游泳，但驮着全副武装的人可不行。我们得建造木筏，把头盔、铠甲和长枪等兵器运过去，可我们不但没有木头，更没有时间。泰温大人已经往北来了……”他握紧拳头。
Robb glanced from her to Greyjoy, searching for an answer and finding none. For a moment he looked even younger than his fifteen years, despite his mail and sword and the stubble on his cheeks. “What would my lord father do?” he asked her.
“佛雷大人若想阻拦我们，那是自寻死路。”席恩·葛雷乔伊以他一贯的自信口吻说，“我们的兵力足足是他五倍，罗柏，如果必要，你可以轻易拿下孪河城。”
“Find a way across,” she told him. “Whatever it took.”
“恐怕不容易，”凯特琳警告他们，“至少绝非短时间内可以攻下。当你们还在架设攻城器械的时候，泰温·兰尼斯特便会带着大军从后掩杀而来。”
The next morning it was Ser Brynden Tully himself who rode back to them. He had put aside the heavy plate and helm he’d worn as the Knight of the Gate for the lighter leather-and-mail of an outrider, but his obsidian fish still fastened his cloak.
罗柏看看她，又看看葛雷乔伊，想要找寻答案，但徒劳无功。一时之间，他虽然披甲带剑，两颊又留了短须，看起来却比十五岁还要年幼。“父亲会怎么做？”他问她。
Her uncle’s face was grave as he swung down off his horse. “There has been a battle under the walls of Riverrun,” he said, his mouth grim. “We had it from a Lannister outrider we took captive. The Kingslayer has destroyed Edmure’s host and sent the lords of the Trident reeling in flight.”
“想办法过河，”她告诉他，“用尽一切方法。”
A cold hand clutched at Catelyn’s heart. “And my brother?”
翌日清晨，布林登·徒利爵士亲自骑马回报，他已经卸下血门骑士的重铠和头盔，换上轻便的斥候皮甲，但那条黑曜石雕的鱼依旧扣住披风。
“Wounded and taken prisoner,” Ser Brynden said. “Lord Blackwood and the other survivors are under siege inside Riverrun, surrounded by Jaime’s host.”
叔叔脸色沉重地翻身下马。“奔流城下有一场战事，”他抿抿嘴，“我们是从一个被俘的兰尼斯特斥候口中听说的。弑君者歼灭了艾德慕的军队，把三河诸侯打得四散奔逃。”
Robb looked fretful. “We must get across this accursed river if we’re to have any hope of relieving them in time.”
一只冰冷的手攫住了凯特琳的心。“我弟弟怎样？”
“That will not be easily done,” her uncle cautioned. “Lord Frey has pulled his whole strength back inside his castles, and his gates are closed and barred.”
“受伤被俘，”布林登爵士道，“布莱伍德大人和其他生还者被困在奔流城里，詹姆的大军将他们团团包围。”
“Damn the man,” Robb swore. “If the old fool does not relent and let me cross, he’ll leave me no choice but to storm his walls. I’ll pull the Twins down around his ears if I have to, we’ll see how well he likes that!”
罗柏一脸焦躁。“我们得赶紧渡过这条该死的河，否则就来不及了。”
“You sound like a sulky boy, Robb,” Catelyn said sharply. “A child sees an obstacle, and his first thought is to run around it or knock it down. A lord must learn that sometimes words can accomplish what swords cannot.”
“恐怕不容易，”叔叔告诫他，“佛雷大人所有的兵力现下都在城里，城门却是紧紧关闭。”
Robb’s neck reddened at the rebuke. “Tell me what you mean, Mother,” he said meekly.
“这家伙该死，”罗柏咒道，“如果这老王八蛋不肯让我过去，我别无选择，非得攻城不可，待我们把孪河城拆个一干二净，瞧他喜不喜欢！”
“The Freys have held the crossing for six hundred years, and for six hundred years they have never failed to exact their toll.”
“罗柏，你的话听起来活像个赌气的小孩。”凯特琳口气锐利地说，“小孩子一遇阻碍，不是想绕过去，就是想把它推倒。作为一方领主，你得清楚言语有时候可以解决武力所办不到的事。”
“What toll? What does he want?”
听她责备，罗柏从脸孔红到脖子。“母亲，请您告诉我您的意见。”他口气温顺地说。
She smiled. “That is what we must discover.”
“佛雷家族把守渡口已经六百年，六百年来，他们从来不忘收取过桥费。”
“And what if I do not choose to pay this toll?”
“过桥费？他到底想怎样？”
“Then you had best retreat back to Moat Cailin, deploy to meet Lord Tywin in battle … or grow wings. I see no other choices.” Catelyn put her heels to her horse and rode off, leaving her son to ponder her words. It would not do to make him feel as if his mother were usurping his place. Did you teach him wisdom as well as valor, Ned? she wondered. Did you teach him how to kneel? The graveyards of the Seven Kingdoms were full of brave men who had never learned that lesson.
她微笑道：“这就轮到我们去发现了。”
It was near midday when their vanguard came in sight of the Twins, where the Lords of the Crossing had their seat.
“假如我不打算付过桥费呢？”
The Green Fork ran swift and deep here, but the Freys had spanned it many centuries past and grown rich off the coin men paid them to cross. Their bridge was a massive arch of smooth grey rock, wide enough for two wagons to pass abreast; the Water Tower rose from the center of the span, commanding both road and river with its arrow slits, murder holes, and portcullises. It had taken the Freys three generations to complete their bridge; when they were done they’d thrown up stout timber keeps on either bank, so no one might cross without their leave.
“那么你最好退回卡林湾，布好阵势迎接泰温大人……不然就是长出翅膀。我看没别的方法。”凯特琳轻踢马肚，向前奔去，让儿子留下来思索她的话。若是让他觉得母亲在抢夺他的权位，那可不成。奈德，除了勇气之外，你可有教导他智慧？她暗想，你可有教导他如何低头？七大王国的坟墓里多的是徒有勇武，却不知该何时低头的人。
The timber had long since given way to stone. The Twins—two squat, ugly, formidable castles, identical in every respect, with the bridge arching between—had guarded the crossing for centuries. High curtain walls, deep moats, and heavy oak-and-iron gates protected the approaches, the bridge footings rose from within stout inner keeps, there was a barbican and portcullis on either bank, and the Water Tower defended the span itself.
日近正午，孪河城进入先锋部队的视线，此地便是河渡口领主的根据地。
One glance was sufficient to tell Catelyn that the castle would not be taken by storm. The battlements bristled with spears and swords and scorpions, there was an archer at every crenel and arrow slit, the drawbridge was up, the portcullis down, the gates closed and barred.
这里的绿叉河水既深且急，但佛雷家族的势力早在几世纪前便横跨两岸，并靠着渡河者缴纳的费用致富。他们建造的通道是一座巨大的平滑灰石拱桥，宽度足以让两部马车并眉而行；卫河塔矗立于弧桥中央，以其射箭孔、杀人洞和铁闸门睥睨河流和道路。佛雷家花了三代才完成这座拱桥，竣工之后，他们在两岸都筑起木头堡垒，如此一来，任何人若未经他们允许，都不能过河。
The Greatjon began to curse and swear as soon as he saw what awaited them. Lord Rickard Karstark glowered in silence. “That cannot be assaulted, my lords,” Roose Bolton announced.
如今木头早已改为石材，孪河城——两座方正、丑陋却坚固的城堡，两边的样貌几乎完全相同，拱桥则横越其间——已经守护渡口几世纪之久。它有着高耸的域墙，深深的护城河和厚重的橡木镶铁门。桥的两边入口均位于防护严密的内城，两岸有桥头堡和铁闸门，河中央则由卫河塔保护。
“Nor can we take it by siege, without an army on the far bank to invest the other castle,” Helman Tallhart said gloomily. Across the deep-running green waters, the western twin stood like a reflection of its eastern brother. “Even if we had the time. Which, to be sure, we do not.”
凯特琳只需一眼，便看出面前的城堡无法迅速攻陷。城墙上处处是枪剑光影和大型弓弩，每个雉堞和箭口皆有弓箭手部署，吊桥已经升起，闸门也已降下。城门紧闭，扣上门闩。
As the northern lords studied the castle, a sally port opened, a plank bridge slid across the moat, and a dozen knights rode forth to confront them, led by four of Lord Walder’s many sons. Their banner bore twin towers, dark blue on a field of pale silver-grey. Ser Stevron Frey, Lord Walder’s heir, spoke for them. The Freys all looked like weasels; Ser Stevron, past sixty with grandchildren of his own, looked like an especially old and tired weasel, yet he was polite enough. “My lord father has sent me to greet you, and inquire as to who leads this mighty host.”
大琼恩一见，立即开始高声咒骂。瑞卡德·卡史塔克伯爵则静静地怒视。“诸位大人，这样的城堡无法在短时间内攻下。”卢斯·波顿表示。
“I do.” Robb spurred his horse forward. He was in his armor, with the direwolf shield of Winterfell strapped to his saddle and Grey Wind padding by his side.
“若我们在对岸没有军队，就算包围也不行，”赫曼·陶哈郁闷地说。深流奔涌的绿水对岸，河西城堡有如其东边兄弟的倒影。“即使时间充裕也没办法，而我们的时间可是一点也不充裕。”
The old knight looked at her son with a faint flicker of amusement in his watery grey eyes, though his gelding whickered uneasily and sidled away from the direwolf. “My lord father would be most honored if you would share meat and mead with him in the castle and explain your purpose here.”
正当北方诸侯观察城堡时，一扇边门突然打开，伸出一座木板桥跨越护城河，十来个骑士朝他们而来。他们由瓦德侯爵的四个儿子率领，打着银灰色底、深蓝双塔的旗帜。史提夫伦·瓦德爵士，瓦德侯爵的继承人，代表他们发言。佛雷家的人个个看起来像黄鼠狼；年过六旬，自己都有孙子的史提夫伦爵士，看起来尤其像只年老而疲惫的黄鼠狼，不过他到底还颇有礼貌。“家父派我前来问候诸位，敢问率领这支劲旅的是何许人？”
His words crashed among the lords bannermen like a great stone from a catapult. Not one of them approved. They cursed, argued, shouted down each other.
“是我。”罗柏催马上前。他全身铠甲，临冬城的冰原狼徽盾系在马鞍，灰风轻步跟在身边。
“You must not do this, my lord,” Galbart Glover pleaded with Robb. “Lord Walder is not to be trusted.”
老骑士水汪汪的灰眼里闪现出一抹兴味，但他的坐骑却不安地哼了两声，避开了冰原狼。“如您愿意到城里与家父共进晚餐，表明您的来意，相信他必定大感荣幸。”
Roose Bolton nodded. “Go in there alone and you’re his. He can sell you to the Lannisters, throw you in a dungeon, or slit your throat, as he likes.”
他的这番话，有如投石机射出的巨石，在北境诸侯中炸裂开来。众人均大为不满，他们或咒骂，或争执，彼此大呼小叫。
“If he wants to talk to us, let him open his gates, and we will all share his meat and mead,” declared Ser Wendel Manderly.
“大人，您千万不能去，”盖伯特·葛洛佛向罗柏陈情。“绝不能信任瓦德大人。”
“Or let him come out and treat with Robb here, in plain sight of his men and ours,” suggested his brother, Ser Wylis.
卢斯·波顿点点头。“单身赴约，您就是任他宰割。他可以把您卖给兰尼斯特，把您丢进地牢，甚或割了您喉咙，一切随他高兴。”
Catelyn Stark shared all their doubts, but she had only to glance at Ser Stevron to see that he was not pleased by what he was hearing. A few more words and the chance would be lost. She had to act, and quickly. “I will go ,” she said loudly.
“如果他想跟我们谈谈，叫他打开城门，让我们全体进去与他共进晚餐。”文德尔·曼德勒爵士高声宣布。
“You, my lady?” The Greatjon furrowed his brow.
“干脆要他出来，就在这里宴请罗柏，当着双方所有人的面。”他的哥哥威里斯爵士提议。
“Mother, are you certain?” Clearly, Robb was not.
凯特琳·史塔克与他们同感疑虑，但她只瞄了史提夫伦爵士一眼，便看出他对所见所闻甚感不悦，只要再多几句，机会就会稍纵即逝。她必须采取行动，越快越好。“让我去。”她高声说。
“Never more,” Catelyn lied glibly. “Lord Walder is my father’s bannerman. I have known him since I was a girl. He would never offer me any harm.” Unless he saw some profit in it , she added silently, but some truths did not bear saying, and some lies were necessary.
“夫人，您去？”大琼恩皱起眉头。
“I am certain my lord father would be pleased to speak to the Lady Catelyn,” Ser Stevron said. “To vouchsafe for our good intentions, my brother Ser Perwyn will remain here until she is safely returned to you.”
“母亲，您确定吗？”显然，罗柏并不确定。
“He shall be our honored guest,” said Robb. Ser Perwyn, the youngest of the four Freys in the party, dismounted and handed the reins of his horse to a brother. “I require my lady mother’s return by evenfall, Ser Stevron,” Robb went on. “It is not my intent to linger here long.”
“我当然确定，”凯特琳伶俐地撒谎，“瓦德大人是我父亲的封臣，我从小就认识他，他绝对不会对我怎么样的。”除非有利可图，她在心里暗暗注明，但有些事情不能明讲，有些谎言也是必须。
Ser Stevron Frey gave a polite nod. “As you say, my lord.” Catelyn spurred her horse forward and did not look back. Lord Walder’s sons and envoys fell in around her.
“相信家父一定乐于和凯特琳夫人谈谈，”史提夫伦爵士道。“为了保证我们并无不良企图，我弟弟派温爵士会留在这里，直到夫人您安全归来为止。”
Her father had once said of Walder Frey that he was the only lord in the Seven Kingdoms who could field an army out of his breeches. When the Lord of the Crossing welcomed Catelyn in the great hall of the east castle, surrounded by twenty living sons (minus Ser Perwyn, who would have made twenty-one), thirty-six grandsons, nineteen great-grandsons, and numerous daughters, granddaughters, bastards, and grandbastards, she understood just what he had meant.
“而我们将待之如上宾。”罗柏说。派温爵士是佛雷家四兄弟中最年轻的一位，他下了马，把缰绳交给哥哥。“史提夫伦爵士，我希望家母能在日落时归来，”罗柏继续说，“我不愿在此逗留。”
Lord Walder was ninety, a wizened pink weasel with a bald spotted head, too gouty to stand unassisted. His newest wife, a pale frail girl of sixteen years, walked beside his litter when they carried him in. She was the eighth Lady Frey.
史提夫伦·佛雷爵士礼貌地点头：“大人，照您吩咐。”凯特琳轻踢马刺，向前奔去，没有回头。瓦德侯爵的儿子和护卫们随即跟上。
“It is a great pleasure to see you again after so many years, my lord,” Catelyn said.
父亲曾说，放眼七大王国，瓦德·佛雷是惟一能自己生出一支军队的领主。当天，河渡口侯爵在河东城堡的大厅里欢迎凯特琳时，他身边围绕着二十个活着的儿子（这不包括派温爵士，加上他就成了二十一个），三十六个孙子，十九个曾孙，以及许多女儿、孙女、私生子、私生女，和私生孙子孙女。她终于明白父亲是什么意思。
The old man squinted at her suspiciously. “Is it? I doubt that. Spare me your sweet words, Lady Catelyn, I am too old. Why are you here? Is your boy too proud to come before me himself? What am I to do with you?”
瓦德侯爵今年九十，活像条干瘪的粉红色黄鼠狼，头早已光秃，上面遍布老人斑，因为痛风的关系，若无人搀扶，就没法站立。他最新一任妻子是个十六岁的女孩，苍白瘦弱，跟在他担架旁边走进来。她是第八任佛雷夫人。
Catelyn had been a girl the last time she had visited the Twins, but even then Lord Walder had been irascible, sharp of tongue, and blunt of manner. Age had made him worse than ever, it would seem. She would need to choose her words with care, and do her best to take no offense from his.
“大人，多年不见，今日重逢，真是倍感喜悦。”凯特琳道。
“Father,” Ser Stevron said reproachfully, “you forget yourself. Lady Stark is here at your invitation.”
老人满腹狐疑地眯眼盯着她。“是么？我倒很怀疑。凯特琳夫人，我年纪大了，你就省省这些甜言蜜语吧。为什么是你在这里？难道说你家儿子太尊贵，不愿亲自来见我？我又该拿你怎么办呢？”
“Did I ask you? You are not Lord Frey yet, not until I die. Do I look dead? I’ll hear no instructions from you.”
凯特琳上次造访孪河城，还是个小女孩，当时的瓦德侯爵便已经是个脾气暴躁，语气尖刻且无甚礼貌的人，看来岁月使他更令人难以忍受了。她的措辞必须格外谨慎，尽全力不去在意他的言语冒犯。
“This is no way to speak in front of our noble guest, Father,” one of his younger sons said.
“父亲，”史提夫伦爵士语带责备地说，“您忘了吗？凯特琳夫人正是受您之邀而来。”
“Now my bastards presume to teach me courtesy,” Lord Walder complained. “I’ll speak any way I like, damn you. I’ve had three kings to guest in my life, and queens as well, do you think I require lessons from the likes of you, Ryger? Your mother was milking goats the first time I gave her my seed.” He dismissed the red-faced youth with a flick of his fingers and gestured to two of his other sons. “Danwell, Whalen, help me to my chair.”
“我在问你吗？我还没死，你就不是佛雷侯爵。我看起来像死人吗？我用不着听你说教。”
They shifted Lord Walder from his litter and carried him to the high seat of the Freys, a tall chair of black oak whose back was carved in the shape of two towers linked by a bridge. His young wife crept up timidly and covered his legs with a blanket. When he was settled, the old man beckoned Catelyn forward and planted a papery dry kiss on her hand. “There,” he announced. “Now that I have observed the courtesies, my lady, perhaps my sons will do me the honor of shutting their mouths. Why are you here?”
“父亲大人，这不是待客之道吧？”他另一个年纪较轻的儿子说。
“To ask you to open your gates, my lord,” Catelyn replied politely. “My son and his lords bannermen are most anxious to cross the river and be on their way.”
“这会儿连我的私生子都教训起我来啦？”瓦德侯爵抱怨，“你们都该死，我爱说什么便说什么。莱格，我这辈子招待过三个国王，王后就不用提了，你觉得我还用你教我‘待客之道’？我第一次在你妈身上播种的时候，她还在牧羊咧。”他弹弹指头，赶走那面红耳赤的年轻人，然后又向另外两个儿子打了个手势。“丹威尔，惠伦，扶我到椅子坐下。”
“To Riverrun?” He sniggered. “Oh, no need to tell me, no need. I’m not blind yet. The old man can still read a map.”
他们把瓦德侯爵从担架上扶下来，搀他到佛雷家的高位坐下。那是一张黑橡木椅子，椅背雕成以桥相连的双城式样。他年轻的妻子怯生生地走过来，为他的双脚盖上毛毯。老人坐定之后，招手示意凯特琳上前，在她手掌印下一个干如纸张的吻。“喏，”他宣布，“夫人，我已经行过礼了，或许我的儿子们可以赏个脸，给我闭上嘴巴。请问你来此有何目的？”
“To Riverrun,” Catelyn confirmed. She saw no reason to deny it. “Where I might have expected to find you, my lord. You are still my father’s bannerman, are you not?”
“大人，我们想请您打开城门。”凯特彬彬有礼地回答，“我儿子和他的封臣正急着渡河上路。”
“Heh,” said Lord Walder, a noise halfway between a laugh and a grunt. “I called my swords, yes I did, here they are, you saw them on the walls. It was my intent to march as soon as all my strength was assembled. Well, to send my sons. I am well past marching myself, Lady Catelyn.” He looked around for likely confirmation and pointed to a tall, stooped man of fifty years. “Tell her, Jared. Tell her that was my intent.”
“去奔流城？”他窃笑一声，“喏，用不着告诉我，用不着。我的眼睛还没瞎，老人家照样可以看地图。”
“It was, my lady,” said Ser Jared Frey, one of his sons by his second wife. “On my honor.”
“去奔流城。”凯特琳证实。她不觉有何必要否认。“大人，我本以为会在那里见到您。您仍然是家父的臣属，是吧？”
“Is it my fault that your fool brother lost his battle before we could march?” He leaned back against his cushions and scowled at her, as if challenging her to dispute his version of events. “I am told the Kingslayer went through him like an axe through ripe cheese. Why should my boys hurry south to die? All those who did go south are running north again.”
“嘿，”瓦德侯爵道，他的声音介乎于冷笑和咕哝之间。“你也看到啦，城墙上那么多兵，还不都是我召集的？我打算等部队全体到齐之后，立刻就出发。当然啦，我的意思是派我儿子去，凯特琳夫人，我这身老骨头已经过了带兵打仗的年纪啰。”他环顾四周，仿佛在期待众人的肯定，接着他指指一位五十来岁，高大驼背的男子。“杰瑞，你告诉她，告诉她这的确是我的打算。”
Catelyn would gladly have spitted the querulous old man and roasted him over a fire, but she had only till evenfall to open the bridge. Calmly, she said, “All the more reason that we must reach Riverrun, and soon. Where can we go to talk, my lord?”
“夫人，的确是这样，”杰瑞·佛雷爵士道，他是第二任佛雷夫人所生的儿子。“我以我的名誉发誓。”
“We’re talking now,” Lord Frey complained. The spotted pink head snapped around. “What are you all looking at?” he shouted at his kin. “Get out of here. Lady Stark wants to speak to me in private. Might be she has designs on my fidelity, heh . Go, all of you, find something useful to do. Yes, you too, woman. Out, out, out.” As his sons and grandsons and daughters and bastards and nieces and nephews streamed from the hall, he leaned close to Catelyn and confessed, “They’re all waiting for me to die. Stevron’s been waiting for forty years, but I keep disappointing him. Heh . Why should I die just so he can be a lord? I ask you. I won’t do it.”
“你那蠢弟弟在我们动身之前就吃了败仗，难道说这是我的错？”他向后靠上背垫，皱眉看她，仿佛在等她质疑他的说词。“我听说弑君者把他打得落花流水，跟拿斧头切乳酪一样。我的儿子干嘛急着南下送死啊？到南方去的人现在不都慌着逃回来？”
“I have every hope that you will live to be a hundred.”
凯特琳真想朝这满腹牢骚的老头吐口水，然后把他架在火上烤，然而她只有黄昏之前这段时间来打开桥梁，于是她平静地说：“所以我们才更应该尽快赶到奔流城。大人，我们可否换个地方谈话？”
“That would boil them, to be sure. Oh, to be sure. Now, what do you want to say?”
“我们现在不就在谈？”佛雷侯爵抱怨。他那遍布老人斑的粉红秃头倏地一转。“你们看什么？”他朝周围的亲人吼，“还不快滚？史塔克夫人要跟我私下谈谈，搞不好她想让我出轨哩，嘿。你们通通都退下，去找点有用的事做。对，你也一样，臭女人，出去，出去，出去！”他的儿子、孙子、女儿、私生子、外孙、外孙女们鱼贯离开大厅，他则靠向凯特琳，坦白承认，“他们全部都在等我死，史提夫伦已经等了四十年啦，可我偏要教他失望。嘿，我干嘛提早上天，好让他继承爵位啊，你说是不是？我偏不要。”
“We want to cross,” Catelyn told him.
“我衷心希望您活到一百岁。”
“Oh, do you? That’s blunt. Why should I let you?”
“那可会叫他们七窍生烟，一定会的。好吧，你到底想谈什么？”
For a moment her anger flared. “If you were strong enough to climb your own battlements, Lord Frey, you would see that my son has twenty thousand men outside your walls.”
“我们想渡河。”凯特琳对他说。
“They’ll be twenty thousand fresh corpses when Lord Tywin gets here,” the old man shot back. “Don’t you try and frighten me, my lady. Your husband’s in some traitor’s cell under the Red Keep, your father’s sick, might be dying, and Jaime Lannister’s got your brother in chains. What do you have that I should fear? That son of yours? I’ll match you son for son, and I’ll still have eighteen when yours are all dead.”
“哦，是嘛？你说得轻巧，我为何放你们过去？”
“You swore an oath to my father,” Catelyn reminded him.
一时之间，她的怒意猛地冒上来。“佛雷大人，假如你还有力气爬上自己的城墙，你会看到城外有我儿子的两万精兵。”
He bobbed his head side to side, smiling. “Oh, yes, I said some words, but I swore oaths to the crown too, it seems to me. Joffrey’s the king now, and that makes you and your boy and all those fools out there no better than rebels. If I had the sense the gods gave a fish, I’d help the Lannisters boil you all.”
“等泰温大人到来，他们就会变成两万具活尸，”老人不甘示弱。“夫人，你少跟我来这套。你丈夫因叛国被关在红堡底下的牢房，你老爹卧病在床，弄不好快没气了，而詹姆·兰尼斯特又抓了你老弟，你拿什么来吓唬我？你那宝贝儿子吗？我可以跟你一个换一个，等你儿子死光了，我还剩下十八个。”
“Why don’t you?” she challenged him.
“你可是宣誓效忠于我父亲。”凯特琳提醒他。
Lord Walder snorted with disdain. “Lord Tywin the proud and splendid, Warden of the West, Hand of the King, oh, what a great man that one is, him and his gold this and gold that and lions here and lions there. I’ll wager you, he eats too many beans, he breaks wind just like me, but you’ll never hear him admit it, oh, no. What’s he got to be so puffed up about anyway? Only two sons, and one of them’s a twisted little monster. I’ll match him son for son, and I’ll still have nineteen and a half left when all of his are dead!” He cackled. “If Lord Tywin wants my help, he can bloody well ask for it.”
他的头左右摇摆，微微一笑：“呵，可不是吗，我发过誓，可我也宣誓效忠王室啊，依我看呢，这会儿既然乔佛里是国王了，你和你家小鬼，以及外面那群蠢蛋不就是叛徒嘛？对不对？这事连鱼都知道，我应该帮兰尼斯特把你们通通杀光。”
That was all Catelyn needed to hear. “I am asking for your help, my lord,” she said humbly. “And my father and my brother and my lord husband and my sons are asking with my voice.”
“那你为什么不帮他？”她质问他。
Lord Walder jabbed a bony finger at her face. “Save your sweet words, my lady. Sweet words I get from my wife. Did you see her? Sixteen she is, a little flower, and her honey’s only for me. I wager she gives me a son by this time next year. Perhaps I’ll make him heir, wouldn’t that boil the rest of them?”
瓦德侯爵不屑地哼了一声。“泰温大人，他可是个大人物哩，既是西境守护，又是御前首相，呵，多了不起，这样也是金子打的，那样又是狮子形状，心高气傲得很。我敢跟你打赌，他豆子吃多了，跟我一样会放屁，不过你甭想听他承认，想都别想。他在拽个什么劲咧？也不过两个儿子，其中一个还是畸形小怪物，我可以拿儿子跟他一个换一个，等他的都死光了，我还剩十九个半咧！”他咯咯笑道，“如果泰温大人需要我帮忙，他好歹可以问他妈的一声吧？”
“I’m certain she will give you many sons.”
凯特琳需要的就是这句。“大人，我现在就是请求您帮忙，”她谦卑地说，“我代表我父亲、我弟弟、我丈夫以及我儿子向您请求。”
His head bobbed up and down. “Your lord father did not come to the wedding. An insult, as I see it. Even if he is dying. He never came to my last wedding either. He calls me the Late Lord Frey, you know. Does he think I’m dead? I’m not dead, and I promise you, I’ll outlive him as I outlived his father. Your family has always pissed on me, don’t deny it, don’t lie, you know it’s true. Years ago, I went to your father and suggested a match between his son and my daughter. Why not? I had a daughter in mind, sweet girl, only a few years older than Edmure, but if your brother didn’t warm to her, I had others he might have had, young ones, old ones, virgins, widows, whatever he wanted. No, Lord Hoster would not hear of it. Sweet words he gave me, excuses, but what I wanted was to get rid of a daughter.
瓦德大人伸出一只干枯的手指指着她。“夫人，你省省这些甜言蜜语，甜言蜜语我听我老婆讲就够了。你见着她没有？才十六岁，像朵小花，她的花蜜可是只给我一个人喝哟。我敢打赌，明年这时候啊，她就会再给我添个儿子。说不定我就让他当我的继承人，你说这会不会把他们活活气死啊？”
“And your sister, that one, she’s full as bad. It was, oh, a year ago, no more, Jon Arryn was still the King’s Hand, and I went to the city to see my sons ride in the tourney. Stevron and Jared are too old for the lists now, but Danwell and Hosteen rode, Perwyn as well, and a couple of my bastards tried the melee. If I’d known how they’d shame me, I would never have troubled myself to make the journey. Why did I need to ride all that way to see Hosteen knocked off his horse by that Tyrell whelp? I ask you. The boy’s half his age, Ser Daisy they call him, something like that. And Danwell was unhorsed by a hedge knight! Some days I wonder if those two are truly mine. My third wife was a Crakehall, all of the Crakehall women are sluts. Well, never mind about that, she died before you were born, what do you care?
“我相信她一定会给您添许多儿子的。”
“I was speaking of your sister. I proposed that Lord and Lady Arryn foster two of my grandsons at court, and offered to take their own son to ward here at the Twins. Are my grandsons unworthy to be seen at the king’s court? They are sweet boys, quiet and mannerly. Walder is Merrett’s son, named after me, and the other one … heh , I don’t recall … he might have been another Walder, they’re always naming them Walder so I’ll favor them, but his father … which one was his father now?” His face wrinkled up. “Well, whoever he was, Lord Arryn wouldn’t have him, or the other one, and I blame your lady sister for that. She frosted up as if I’d suggested selling her boy to a mummer’s show or making a eunuch out of him, and when Lord Arryn said the child was going to Dragonstone to foster with Stannis Baratheon, she stormed off without a word of regrets and all the Hand could give me was apologies. What good are apologies? I ask you.”
他的头前后摇摆。“令尊没来参加我的婚礼，在我看来，就算他快死了，这依旧是侮辱。别忘了，我上次结婚他也没来，还叫我做‘迟到的佛雷侯爵’，这你总知道吧？难道他以为我死了？我可没死，而且我跟你保证，我绝对要活得比他长，就像我活得比他老爸还久一样。你们家的人老是看我不顺眼，你别否认，也别想骗我，你很清楚我说的是实话。好些年前，我去找令尊，提议让他儿子和我女儿联姻。这有什么不好？我有个乖女儿是合适人选，只比艾德慕大几岁，就算你老弟不喜欢她，我也还有其他女儿给他挑，要年轻的有年轻的，要老的有老的，要闺女要寡妇要什么样的都成，可是呢，霍斯特大人说什么也不肯。他讲了一大堆甜言蜜语，通通都是借口，我真正想要的却是赶紧嫁掉一个女儿啊。”
Catelyn frowned, disquieted. “I had understood that Lysa’s boy was to be fostered with Lord Tywin at Casterly Rock.”
“还有你老妹，同样一副坏德行，那是一年前的事啰，当时琼恩·艾林还是御前首相，我到城里去看我儿子参加比武竞技。史提夫伦和杰瑞年纪都太大，没法下场比武，不过丹威尔和霍斯丁前去参加，派温也去了，我还有两个私生子参加团队比试。早知道他们会丢我的脸，我也不必大费周章地跑去，我倒是问你，我干嘛千里迢迢跑去看霍斯丁被提利尔家那小崽子打下马来啊？那小鬼是他一半年纪，大家都叫他什么‘小花爵士’；更可气的是丹威尔竟被一个雇佣骑士打下马来！有时候我还真怀疑他们俩到底是不是我的种？我的第三任老婆是个克雷赫家的人，克雷赫家的女人通通是些残货。唉，这些都不重要啦，你还没出生她就死了，所以干你什么事？”
“No, it was Lord Stannis,” Walder Frey said irritably. “Do you think I can’t tell Lord Stannis from Lord Tywin? They’re both bungholes who think they’re too noble to shit, but never mind about that, I know the difference. Or do you think I’m so old I can’t remember? I’m ninety and I remember very well. I remember what to do with a woman too. That wife of mine will give me a son before this time next year, I’ll wager. Or a daughter, that can’t be helped. Boy or girl, it will be red, wrinkled, and squalling, and like as not she’ll want to name it Walder or Walda.”
“我刚刚在说你妹妹。我向艾林公爵夫妇提议让我两个孙子到宫廷里做他们的养子，与之相对呢，让他们的儿子到孪河城来住一段时日。哼，莫非我的孙子就那么见不得人，没资格给朝廷里的人看？他们可都是既安静又懂礼的乖孩子，瓦德是梅里的儿子，照着我的名字取的，另外一个哩……嘿，我不记得了……好像也叫瓦德。他们都把孩子叫做瓦德·瓦妲，以为这样就会讨我喜欢，那孩子的爹……是哪一个来着？”他的脸整个皱成一团。“唉，管他是谁，总之艾林大人不要，不管哪个都不要，而我得把这事怪罪到你妹妹头上。你没看她那样子，整个人像是结了冰，好像我打算把她儿子卖给戏班，或是抓去当太监似的！艾林大人为了平息尴尬，便吐露那孩子已经决定送到龙石岛去给史坦尼斯·拜拉席恩收养，一听此言，她立刻半声不吭地冲了出去，首相大人只好不停地向我道歉。我倒是问你，道歉顶什么用哩？”
Catelyn was not concerned with what Lady Frey might choose to name her child. “Jon Arryn was going to foster his son with Lord Stannis, you are quite certain of that?”
凯特琳有些不安地皱起眉头。“我记得莱沙的孩子是要送到凯岩城去给泰温大人收养的。”
“Yes, yes, yes,” the old man said. “Only he died, so what does it matter? You say you want to cross the river?”
“不对，是史坦尼斯大人，”瓦德。佛雷很不耐烦地说，“你以为我连史坦尼斯大人和泰温大人都分不出来吗？他们两个都是自以为高贵不拉屎的粪坑，但即便这样，我还是知道谁是谁，莫非你觉得我老了，就记不清啦？我今年才九十，记得清楚得很，连怎么搞女人也没忘。我敢跟你打赌，我家那老婆不到明年这时候就会给我再添个儿子，或者女儿，那也没法子。哎呀，管他儿子女儿，还不都是红彤彤地皱成一团，哭个没完没了？我看她八成又要给孩子取名瓦德或瓦妲啦。”
“We do.”
凯特琳对佛雷夫人如何帮孩子取名毫无兴趣。“琼恩·艾林有意让史坦尼斯大人收养他的儿子，此事您可确定？”
“Well, you can’t!” Lord Walder announced crisply. “Not unless I allow it, and why should I? The Tullys and the Starks have never been friends of mine.” He pushed himself back in his chair and crossed his arms, smirking, waiting for her answer.
“对，对，对，”老人说，“只是他死啦，这有什么差别？你说你们想过河？”
The rest was only haggling.
“是的。”
A swollen red sun hung low against the western hills when the gates of the castle opened. The drawbridge creaked down, the portcullis winched up, and Lady Catelyn Stark rode forth to rejoin her son and his lords bannermen. Behind her came Ser Jared Frey, Ser Hosteen Frey, Ser Danwell Frey, and Lord Walder’s bastard son Ronel Rivers, leading a long column of pikemen, rank on rank of shuffling men in blue steel ringmail and silvery grey cloaks.
“唉，你们过不了！”瓦德侯爵干脆地宣布，“除非我答应，可我干嘛答应呢？徒利家和史塔克家对我向来不太友善。”他往后靠向椅背，双手抱胸，露出得意的笑容，等她答复。
Robb galloped out to meet her, with Grey Wind racing beside his stallion. “It’s done,” she told him. “Lord Walder will grant you your crossing. His swords are yours as well, less four hundred he means to keep back to hold the Twins. I suggest that you leave four hundred of your own, a mixed force of archers and swordsmen. He can scarcely object to an offer to augment his garrison … but make certain you give the command to a man you can trust. Lord Walder may need help keeping faith.”
剩下的就只是讨价还价。
“As you say, Mother,” Robb answered, gazing at the ranks of pikemen. “Perhaps … Ser Helman Tallhart, do you think?”
城堡大门打开时，一轮火红夕阳低垂在西方丘陵，吊桥“嘎吱嘎吱”地降下来，闸门缓缓升起，凯特琳·史塔克夫人骑马回到儿子和北境诸侯身边。跟在她身后的是杰瑞·佛雷爵士、霍斯丁·佛雷爵士、丹威尔·佛雷爵士，以及瓦德侯爵的私生子朗诺尔·河文，以及一大队长矛兵。他们身穿蓝色环甲，肩披银色披风，排成纵队，缓步走来。
“A fine choice.”
罗柏快马加鞭地迎上前，灰风飞也似地跟在他身边。“一切都办妥了，”她告诉他，“瓦德大人会让你过河，他的军队也是你的，不过他会留下四百人防守孪河城。我建议你也留下相同数目的剑士和弓箭手，他绝对无法拒绝额外的协防兵力……但千万要找你信得过的人负责指挥。瓦德大人可能会需要提醒，才能守住承诺。”
“What … what did he want of us?”
“母亲，就照您说的办。”罗柏边说边盯着那一大队长矛兵，“或许……让赫曼·陶哈爵士来负责，你意下如何？”
“If you can spare a few of your swords, I need some men to escort two of Lord Frey’s grandsons north to Winterfell,” she told him. “I have agreed to take them as wards. They are young boys, aged eight years and seven. It would seem they are both named Walder. Your brother Bran will welcome the companionship of lads near his own age, I should think.”
“很好。”
“Is that all? Two fosterlings? That’s a small enough price to—”
“他……他要我们怎么样？”
“Lord Frey’s son Olyvar will be coming with us,” she went on. “He is to serve as your personal squire. His father would like to see him knighted, in good time.”
“你要拨出几个手下，护送佛雷大人的两个孙子北上临冬城。”她告诉他，“我已经同意收他们为养子，他们年纪还小，一个七岁，一个八岁，两个都叫瓦德。我想你弟弟布兰应该会很高兴有同龄人作伴。”
“A squire.” He shrugged. “Fine, that’s fine, if he’s—”
“就这样而已？两个养子？这样的代价未免也太——”
“Also, if your sister Arya is returned to us safely, it is agreed that she will marry Lord Walder’s youngest son, Elmar, when the two of them come of age.”
“佛雷大人的儿子奥利法跟我们一起走，”她继续说，“他将担任你的私人侍从，过段时间以后，他的父亲希望能看到他被策封为骑士。”
Robb looked nonplussed. “Arya won’t like that one bit.”
“带个侍从？”他耸耸肩，“很好，没问题，如果他——”
“And you are to wed one of his daughters, once the fighting is done,” she finished. “His lordship has graciously consented to allow you to choose whichever girl you prefer. He has a number he thinks might be suitable.”
“还有，假如你妹妹艾莉亚平安归来，我们同意让她嫁给瓦德大人的幼子艾尔玛，当然，等两人成年以后。”
To his credit, Robb did not flinch. “I see.”
罗柏有些不知所措。“艾莉亚不会喜欢的。”
“Do you consent?”
“等战事结束，你也将迎娶他一个女儿，”她把话说完，“侯爵大人慷慨地同意你自行挑选，他有好些个适合的人选。”
“Can I refuse?”
这次，罗柏倒是眉头都没皱一下。“原来如此。”
“Not if you wish to cross.”
“你同意吗？”
“I consent,” Robb said solemnly. He had never seemed more manly to her than he did in that moment. Boys might play with swords, but it took a lord to make a marriage pact, knowing what it meant.
“我可以拒绝吗？”
They crossed at evenfall as a horned moon floated upon the river. The double column wound its way through the gate of the eastern twin like a great steel snake, slithering across the courtyard, into the keep and over the bridge, to issue forth once more from the second castle on the west bank.
“那你就不能渡河。”
Catelyn rode at the head of the serpent, with her son and her uncle Ser Brynden and Ser Stevron Frey. Behind followed nine tenths of their horse; knights, lancers, freeriders, and mounted bowmen. It took hours for them all to cross. Afterward, Catelyn would remember the clatter of countless hooves on the drawbridge, the sight of Lord Walder Frey in his litter watching them pass, the glitter of eyes peering down through the slats of the murder holes in the ceiling as they rode through the Water Tower.
“我同意。”罗柏郑重地说。在她眼中，他从未像此时这么有成年人的样子。小男孩或许也能舞刀弄剑，但只有真正的成年领主才能明白政治婚约的意涵，并坦然接受。
The larger part of the northern host, pikes and archers and great masses of men-at-arms on foot, remained upon the east bank under the command of Roose Bolton. Robb had commanded him to continue the march south, to confront the huge Lannister army coming north under Lord Tywin.
当晚，一弯新月漂浮水面，他们展开了渡河行动。两列纵队有如一条巨大的钢蛇，蜿蜒进入东河城，迂回绕过广场，通过内城，走上拱桥，经过又一次相同的地形后，从西岸的城堡离开。
For good or ill, her son had thrown the dice.
凯特琳骑在钢蛇前端，同行的有她儿子，叔叔布林登爵士，以及史提夫伦·佛雷爵士。身后是他们九成的骑兵，包括骑士、枪骑兵、自由骑手和弓骑兵。他们花了好几个钟头方才完成穿越。事后，凯特琳始终忘不掉无数的马蹄踏过吊桥发出的声音，以及卫河塔上瓦德·佛雷侯爵炯炯的目光。他坐在担架上，从杀人洞的细长铁条间向下俯瞰，目送他们离去。
*JON
北军的主力，包括徒步的长矛兵、弓箭手和大量民兵留在东岸，由卢斯·波顿指挥。罗柏命令他继续南下，与由泰温大人指挥，正朝北进逼的兰尼斯特大军进行决战。
“A re you well, Snow?” Lord Mormont asked, scowling.
是好是坏，儿子已经孤注一掷。
“Well,” his raven squawked. “Well.”
第六十一章 琼恩
“I am, my lord,” Jon lied … loudly, as if that could make it true. “And you?”
“雪诺，你还好吧？”莫尔蒙司令皱眉问。
Mormont frowned. “A dead man tried to kill me. How well could I be?” He scratched under his chin. His shaggy grey beard had been singed in the fire, and he’d hacked it off. The pale stubble of his new whiskers made him look old, disreputable, and grumpy. “You do not look well. How is your hand?”
“好吧？”他的乌鸦呱呱叫，“好吧？”
“Healing.” Jon flexed his bandaged fingers to show him. He had burned himself more badly than he knew throwing the flaming drapes, and his right hand was swathed in silk halfway to the elbow. At the time he’d felt nothing; the agony had come after. His cracked red skin oozed fluid, and fearsome blood blisters rose between his fingers, big as roaches. “The maester says I’ll have scars, but otherwise the hand should be as good as it was before.”
“大人，我很好。”琼恩撒了谎……还特意大声，仿佛这样可让谎言成真。“您呢？”
“A scarred hand is nothing. On the Wall, you’ll be wearing gloves often as not.”
莫尔蒙又是眉头一皱。“有个死人想杀我，你觉得我能好到哪里去？”他抓了抓下巴。由于长长的灰胡子被火烧到，他便把胡子给割了。新长出来的白色短须使他看起来不仅丑陋了些，老上许多，更显得脾气暴躁。“说实话，你的气色不太好，手怎么样了？”
“As you say, my lord.” It was not the thought of scars that troubled Jon; it was the rest of it. Maester Aemon had given him milk of the poppy, yet even so, the pain had been hideous. At first it had felt as if his hand were still aflame, burning day and night. Only plunging it into basins of snow and shaved ice gave any relief at all. Jon thanked the gods that no one but Ghost saw him writhing on his bed, whimpering from the pain. And when at last he did sleep, he dreamt, and that was even worse. In the dream, the corpse he fought had blue eyes, black hands, and his father’s face, but he dared not tell Mormont that .
“正在复原。”琼恩动动自己绑了绷带的手指给他看。扔那堆窗帘所带来的灼伤比他预期中严重许多，现在他的右手臂缠满了丝绷带，一直绑到手肘。当时他一点感觉也没有，之后才开始疼痛。他裂开的红皮肤内流出液体，一个个吓人的充血水泡布满指间，大得像蟑螂似的。“学士说会留下疤痕，但除此之外应该没有大碍。”
“Dywen and Hake returned last night,” the Old Bear said. “They found no sign of your uncle, no more than the others did.”
“手上有疤没关系，在长城这儿，你大多时候都会戴手套。”
“I know.” Jon had dragged himself to the common hall to sup with his friends, and the failure of the rangers’ search had been all the men had been talking of.
“大人，您说的是。”困扰琼恩的不是疤痕，而是其他的部分。伊蒙师傅给他喝了罂粟花奶，但即便如此，手依旧痛得要命。起初他感觉自己的手仍然着火，日夜烧个不停，惟有将之插进装满陈雪和碎冰的盆子里才能稍减疼痛。琼恩在床上疼痛难耐，翻滚哀嚎的模样，只有白灵知道，为此他暗自感谢天上诸神。可等他真的睡了，他又会作梦，这些梦比手伤还可怕。在梦中，和他厮杀的尸体不仅有蓝眼睛和黑手掌，更有父亲的脸，他可不敢把这个告诉莫尔蒙。
“You know,” Mormont grumbled. “How is it that everyone knows everything around here?” He did not seem to expect an answer. “It would seem there were only the two of … of those creatures , whatever they were, I will not call them men. And thank the gods for that. Any more and … well, that doesn’t bear thinking of. There will be more, though. I can feel it in these old bones of mine, and Maester Aemon agrees. The cold winds are rising. Summer is at an end, and a winter is coming such as this world has never seen.”
“戴文和哈克昨晚回来了，”熊老说，“和其他人一样，他们没找到半点你叔叔的踪迹。”
Winter is coming . The Stark words had never sounded so grim or ominous to Jon as they did now. “My lord,” he asked hesitantly, “it’s said there was a bird last night …”
“我知道。”昨晚琼恩硬拖着身子去大厅和朋友们共进晚餐，当时大家谈论的都是游骑兵失败的搜查行动。
“There was. What of it?”
“你也知道，”莫尔蒙咕哝，“怎么大家什么都知道啊？”他也没期待答案。“看来，总共就那么两个……东西。不管他们是什么，我绝对不承认他们是人。感谢天上诸神。要是再多几个……唉．还是别去想的好。只是我这身老骨头有预感，以后迟早会再碰上，伊蒙师傅也这么说。冷风吹起，夏日将尽，前所未见的寒冬即将来临。”
“I had hoped for some word of my father.”
凛冬将至。对琼恩而言，史塔克家的箴言从未如此阴森，如此充满不祥之气。“大人，”他迟疑地说，“听说昨晚又来了一只鸟儿……”
“Father,” taunted the old raven, bobbing its head as it walked across Mormont’s shoulders. “Father.”
“是有这么回事。怎样？”
The Lord Commander reached up to pinch its beak shut, but the raven hopped up on his head, fluttered its wings, and flew across the chamber to light above a window. “Grief and noise,” Mormont grumbled. “That’s all they’re good for, ravens. Why I put up with that pestilential bird … if there was news of Lord Eddard, don’t you think I would have sent for you? Bastard or no, you’re still his blood. The message concerned Ser Barristan Selmy. It seems he’s been removed from the Kingsguard. They gave his place to that black dog Clegane, and now Selmy’s wanted for treason. The fools sent some watchmen to seize him, but he slew two of them and escaped.” Mormont snorted, leaving no doubt of his view of men who’d send gold cloaks against a knight as renowed as Barristan the Bold. “We have white shadows in the woods and unquiet dead stalking our halls, and a boy sits the Iron Throne,” he said in disgust.
“我想知道有没有我父亲的消息。”
The raven laughed shrilly. “Boy, boy, boy, boy.”
“父亲！”老乌鸦在莫尔蒙肩上走来走去，头上下摆动，嘲弄地叫道，“父亲！”
Ser Barristan had been the Old Bear’s best hope, Jon remembered; if he had fallen, what chance was there that Mormont’s letter would be heeded? He curled his hand into a fist. Pain shot through his burned fingers. “What of my sisters?”
司令伸手想捏住它的长嘴，但乌鸦跳上他的头，拍拍翅膀，飞过房间，停在窗户上。“就只会吵闹捣蛋，”莫尔蒙咕哝着说，“乌鸦通通这副德行，真不知我养这只讨人厌的鸟做什么……如果有艾德大人的消息，你觉得我会不叫你来么？无论你是不是私生子，你毕竟是他的亲生骨肉。信上说的是巴利斯坦·赛尔弥爵士的事。他似乎被从御林铁卫里给革职了。他们把他原先的席位给了那条黑狗克里冈，现在赛尔弥正被通缉中，罪名是叛国。那些蠢才派了几个卫士去拿他，结果他宰了两个后逃走了。”莫尔蒙哼了一声，他对那些派都城守卫去对付像无畏的巴利斯坦如此武艺超凡的人的看法，溢于言表。“我们这儿森林里有白色鬼影，城里面有不安分的死人行走，结果坐在铁王座上的竟是个小毛头！”他语带嫌恶地说。
“The message made no mention of Lord Eddard or the girls.” He gave an irritated shrug. “Perhaps they never got my letter. Aemon sent two copies, with his best birds, but who can say? More like, Pycelle did not deign to reply. It would not be the first time, nor the last. I fear we count for less than nothing in King’s Landing. They tell us what they want us to know, and that’s little enough.”
乌鸦尖声怪笑：“小毛头！小毛头！小毛头！小毛头！”
And you tell me what you want me to know, and that’s less , Jon thought resentfully. His brother Robb had called the banners and ridden south to war, yet no word of that had been breathed to him … save by Samwell Tarly, who’d read the letter to Maester Aemon and whispered its contents to Jon that night in secret, all the time saying how he shouldn’t. Doubtless they thought his brother’s war was none of his concern. It troubled him more than he could say. Robb was marching and he was not. No matter how often Jon told himself that his place was here now, with his new brothers on the Wall, he still felt craven.
琼恩记得熊老对巴利斯坦爵士寄予厚望，如果连他都失势，那莫尔蒙的信还有什么机会上达国王呢？他不禁紧握手指，剧痛却立即从伤口炸裂开来。“那我妹妹呢？”
“Corn,” the raven was crying. “Corn, corn.”
“信上既没提到艾德大人，也没说他女儿的事。”他有些恼火地耸耸肩。“说不定他们根本就没收到我的信。虽然伊蒙师傅送了两份抄本，也派他最好的鸟儿带去了，可这种事谁说得准呢？我看八成是派席尔懒得回信。这也不是第一次了，当然更不会是最后一次。恐怕对君临那些人而言，我们什么也不是。他们只肯告诉我们他们想让我们知道的事，而这些事少得可怜！”
“Oh, be quiet,” the Old Bear told it. “Snow, how soon does Maester Aemon say you’ll have use of that hand back?”
你也只告诉我你想让我知道的事，这些事还更少呢，琼恩忿忿不平地想。罗柏已经号召封臣，率军南进，却没有人告诉他……后来还是念信给伊蒙学士听的山姆威尔·塔利当天夜里偷偷跑来找他，一边轻声细语，一边忏悔自己不该这么做。可想而知，他们一定是认为他兄弟的战争与他无关。然而这却比其他所有事更教他烦心。罗柏正驰骋沙场，他却坐困愁城。无论琼恩如何宽慰自己：如今他的职责所在是与新弟兄们共同防守长城，他依旧觉得自己像个懦夫。
“Soon,” Jon replied.
“玉米！”乌鸦又叫起来，“玉米！玉米！”
“Good.” On the table between them, Lord Mormont laid a large sword in a black metal scabbard banded with silver. “Here. You’ll be ready for this, then.”
“噢，给我闭嘴。”熊老告诉它。“雪诺，伊蒙师傅估计你的手多久可以复原？”
The raven flapped down and landed on the table, strutting toward the sword, head cocked curiously. Jon hesitated. He had no inkling what this meant. “My lord?”
“快了。”琼恩回答。
“The fire melted the silver off the pommel and burnt the crossguard and grip. Well, dry leather and old wood, what could you expect? The blade, now … you’d need a fire a hundred times as hot to harm the blade.” Mormont shoved the scabbard across the rough oak planks. “I had the rest made anew. Take it.”
“那敢情好，”莫尔蒙司令拿出一把剑，放在两人之间的桌上，那剑有着黑色金属镶银边的鞘。“喏，到时候你就用这个。”
“Take it,” echoed his raven, preening. “Take it, take it.”
乌鸦振翅而下，停在桌上，昂首阔步地朝剑走去，一边好奇地歪着头。琼恩犹豫了一下。这究竟是什么意思，他一点头绪都没有。“大人，这是？”
Awkwardly, Jon took the sword in hand. His left hand; his bandaged right was still too raw and clumsy. Carefully he pulled it from its scabbard and raised it level with his eyes.
“之前那场火把剑柄圆头的银给熔掉了，护手和剑柄也被烧毁，唉，干皮革和木头，不烧才有鬼。至于剑本身嘛……你得用热一百倍的火才能伤到剑身。”莫尔蒙把手一挥，连剑带鞘推过粗糙的橡木桌面。“我把其余的部分重新打过了。拿去吧。”
The pommel was a hunk of pale stone weighted with lead to balance the long blade. It had been carved into the likeness of a snarling wolf’s head, with chips of garnet set into the eyes. The grip was virgin leather, soft and black, as yet unstained by sweat or blood. The blade itself was a good half foot longer than those Jon was used to, tapered to thrust as well as slash, with three fullers deeply incised in the metal. Where Ice was a true two-handed greatsword, this was a hand-and-a-halfer, sometimes named a “bastard sword.” Yet the wolf sword actually seemed lighter than the blades he had wielded before. When Jon turned it sideways, he could see the ripples in the dark steel where the metal had been folded back on itself again and again. “This is Valyrian steel, my lord,” he said wonderingly. His father had let him handle Ice often enough; he knew the look, the feel.
“拿去吧！”乌鸦得意洋洋地附和，“拿去吧！拿去吧！”
“It is,” the Old Bear told him. “It was my father’s sword, and his father’s before him. The Mormonts have carried it for five centuries. I wielded it in my day and passed it on to my son when I took the black.”
琼恩僵硬地伸手拿剑。他用的是左手，因为右手不但绑了绷带，而且伤口未愈，不甚灵活。他小心翼翼地将剑从鞘里抽出，举到眼前。
He is giving me his son’s sword . Jon could scarcely believe it. The blade was exquisitely balanced. The edges glimmered faintly as they kissed the light. “Your son—”
剑柄尾端的圆球是一块淡白色的石头，还加了铅以平衡剑身的重量，圆球雕刻成一只咆哮狼头的模样，眼睛是两小片红榴石。剑柄裹着又黑又软的新皮，未经汗渍和血水沾染。剑身则足足比琼恩惯用的剑长了半尺，前端极尖，既能刺击，亦可挥砍，上面开了三道深深的血槽。“寒冰”是名副其实的双手剑，这把则是一手半，有时也称为“长柄剑”。这柄狼剑似乎比他以前用过的剑都轻。琼恩轻转剑身，看到色泽沉暗的精钢剑身历经千锤百炼所留下的波纹。“大人，这是用瓦雷利亚钢锻铸的剑啊。”他讶异地说。父亲以前时常让他把握“寒冰”，所以他知道这外观和手感。
“My son brought dishonor to House Mormont, but at least he had the grace to leave the sword behind when he fled. My sister returned it to my keeping, but the very sight of it reminded me of Jorah’s shame, so I put it aside and thought no more of it until we found it in the ashes of my bedchamber. The original pommel was a bear’s head, silver, yet so worn its features were all but indistinguishable. For you, I thought a white wolf more apt. One of our builders is a fair stonecarver.”
“没错。”熊老告诉他，“这是我父亲的剑，是我祖父传给他的。这把剑在莫尔蒙家族父子相传了五百年，我年轻时也用这把剑，后来我穿上黑衣，便将它传给儿子。”
When Jon had been Bran’s age, he had dreamed of doing great deeds, as boys always did. The details of his feats changed with every dreaming, but quite often he imagined saving his father’s life. Afterward Lord Eddard would declare that Jon had proved himself a true Stark, and place Ice in his hand. Even then he had known it was only a child’s folly; no bastard could ever hope to wield a father’s sword. Even the memory shamed him. What kind of man stole his own brother’s birthright? I have no right to this , he thought, no more than to Ice . He twitched his burned fingers, feeling a throb of pain deep under the skin. “My lord, you honor me, but—”
他将传给儿子的剑给了我，琼恩简直不敢相信。剑刃极度平衡，锋芒一遇光线，立即熠熠发光。“您的儿子——”
“Spare me your but’s , boy,” Lord Mormont interrupted. “I would not be sitting here were it not for you and that beast of yours. You fought bravely … and more to the point, you thought quickly. Fire! Yes, damn it. We ought to have known. We ought to have remembered . The Long Night has come before. Oh, eight thousand years is a good while, to be sure … yet if the Night’s Watch does not remember, who will?”
“我儿让莫尔蒙家族蒙上耻辱，但他逃亡之前，倒还懂得留下这把剑。我妹妹把剑送还给我，然而每当见到它，就让我想起乔拉的事，所以我把剑收起来，日子一久也就忘了，直到这回在我卧室的灰烬里找到它。原本剑柄尾端是个银制熊头，不过因为经年累月的磨损，早已辨认不出。你用的话，我想白狼比较适合。正好我们工匠里面有个不错的雕刻师傅。”
“Who will,” chimed the talkative raven. “Who will.”
当琼恩还在布兰那个年纪的时候，也像所有的男孩子一样，梦想着将来干出一番大事业。虽然每次白日梦的细节都不同，但他总想像自己救了父亲一命，事后艾德公爵宣布琼恩已经证明了自己是真正的史塔克传人，并将“寒冰”交到他手中。即便在当时，他也知道这不过是小孩子的玩笑，私生子是绝不可能继承家传宝剑的。如今想起这些，他却觉得羞耻。夺走自己兄弟的继承权，这算什么？我没资格接受这把剑，他心想，一如我没资格继承“寒冰”。他动动灼伤的手指，感觉到皮肤底下深层的痛楚。“大人，您让我受宠若惊，可是——”
Truly, the gods had heard Jon’s prayer that night; the fire had caught in the dead man’s clothing and consumed him as if his flesh were candle wax and his bones old dry wood. Jon had only to close his eyes to see the thing staggering across the solar, crashing against the furniture and flailing at the flames. It was the face that haunted him most; surrounded by a nimbus of fire, hair blazing like straw, the dead flesh melting away and sloughing off its skull to reveal the gleam of bone beneath.
“小子，少跟我‘可是’。”莫尔蒙司令打断他。“若不是你和你那头狼，我现在就不会坐在这里了。你不仅勇敢……更重要的是，你的脑筋动得快。没错，天杀的，就是用火！我们早该知道，早该想起来。古时也曾有过长夜之劫，唉，八千年虽然久了点……可若是连守夜人都不记得，还有谁会记得呢？”
Whatever demonic force moved Othor had been driven out by the flames; the twisted thing they had found in the ashes had been no more than cooked meat and charred bone. Yet in his nightmare he faced it again … and this time the burning corpse wore Lord Eddard’s features. It was his father’s skin that burst and blackened, his father’s eyes that ran liquid down his cheeks like jellied tears. Jon did not understand why that should be or what it might mean, but it frightened him more than he could say.
“谁会！”聒噪的乌鸦跟着叫，“谁会！”
“A sword’s small payment for a life,” Mormont concluded. “Take it, I’ll hear no more of it, is that understood?”
那天晚上，诸神确是听见了琼恩的祈祷；尸鬼的衣服一着火，瞬间便被烈焰吞噬，仿佛它的皮肤是蜡油，骨头是干柴。琼恩只需闭上眼睛，依然可以见到那具尸体踉跄着走过书房，四处碰撞家具，挥舞双臂拍打火焰的景象。萦绕心头久久不去的是那张脸：四周为火围绕，头发燃如稻草，坏死的肌肉一块块熔解滑落，露出下面的颅骨。
“Yes, my lord.” The soft leather gave beneath Jon’s fingers, as if the sword were molding itself to his grip already. He knew he should be honored, and he was, and yet …
不管驱使奥瑟的是何种恶魔力量，都已被烈火赶走；他们在余烬堆里找到的那团扭曲东西，只不过是烤熟的人肉和烧焦的骨头罢了。然而在他的噩梦里，它又再度到来……这次冒火的尸体头上生着艾德公爵的容貌。焦黑爆突的是父亲的皮肤，如结冻眼泪般流下脸颊的是父亲的眼睛。琼恩不明白为何会做这种梦，也不了解这代表的意义，他只是吓坏了。
He is not my father . The thought leapt unbidden to Jon’s mind. Lord Eddard Stark is my father. I will not forget him, no matter how many swords they give me . Yet he could scarcely tell Lord Mormont that it was another man’s sword he dreamt of …
“一剑换一命，够便宜了。”莫尔蒙总结。“快拿去，别再跟我啰唆，听懂了没？”
“I want no courtesies either,” Mormont said, “so thank me no thanks. Honor the steel with deeds, not words.”
“是，大人。”琼恩的手指抚摩着柔软的皮革，这把剑似乎迫不及待地渴望他的掌握。他明白，这是莫大的荣耀，他也的确非常感激，可是……
Jon nodded. “Does it have a name, my lord?”
他不是我父亲，这个念头毫无预警地跃上琼恩心头。艾德·史塔克公爵才是我父亲。我永远不会忘记他，无论别人给我多少把剑，我都不会变。但他怎么能对莫尔蒙司令说他梦想的是另一个人的剑呢……
“It did, once. Longclaw, it was called.”
“我也不想听什么客套话，”莫尔蒙道，“所以把道谢都省了罢。用实际行动证明你珍惜它，比说多少废话都管用。”
“Claw,” the raven cried. “Claw.”
琼恩点点头。“大人，这把剑可有名讳？”
“Longclaw is an apt name.” Jon tried a practice cut. He was clumsy and uncomfortable with his left hand, yet even so the steel seemed to flow through the air, as if it had a will of its own. “Wolves have claws, as much as bears.”
“以前是有的。名叫‘长爪’。”
The Old Bear seemed pleased by that. “I suppose they do. You’ll want to wear that over the shoulder, I imagine. It’s too long for the hip, at least until you’ve put on a few inches. And you’ll need to work at your two-handed strikes as well. Ser Endrew can show you some moves, when your burns have healed.”
“长爪！”乌鸦大叫，“长爪！”
“Ser Endrew?” Jon did not know the name.
“长爪，好名字，”琼恩试着挥砍了一下。虽然左手持剑，难看又笨拙，但宝剑仿佛凭着自己的意志划破空气。“狼和熊都有爪子。”
“Ser Endrew Tarth, a good man. He’s on his way from the Shadow Tower to assume the duties of master-at-arms. Ser Alliser Thorne left yestermorn for Eastwatch-by-the-Sea.”
熊老听了似乎很高兴。“我也这么想。我看你得把剑背在背后。这剑太长，没法佩在腰际，至少在你再长高个几寸之前是这样。还有，你好好练习一下双手攻击。等你的手伤痊愈，可以找安德鲁爵士教你几招。”
Jon lowered the sword. “Why?” he said, stupidly.
“安德鲁爵士？”琼恩不记得这个名字。
Mormont snorted. “Because I sent him, why do you think? He’s bringing the hand your Ghost tore off the end of Jafer Flowers’s wrist. I have commanded him to take ship to King’s Landing and lay it before this boy king. That should get young Joffrey’s attention, I’d think … and Ser Alliser’s a knight, highborn, anointed, with old friends at court, altogether harder to ignore than a glorified crow.”
“安德鲁·塔斯爵士。他正从影子塔赶来，他是我们新任的教头。艾里沙·索恩爵士昨天早上到东海望去了。”
“Crow.” Jon thought the raven sounded faintly indignant.
琼恩放下剑。“为什么？”他傻傻地问。
“As well,” the Lord Commander continued, ignoring the bird’s protest, “it puts a thousand leagues twixt him and you without it seeming a rebuke.” He jabbed a finger up at Jon’s face. “And don’t think this means I approve of that nonsense in the common hall. Valor makes up for a fair amount of folly, but you’re not a boy anymore, however many years you’ve seen. That’s a man’s sword you have there, and it will take a man to wield her. I’ll expect you to act the part, henceforth.”
莫尔蒙哼了一声。“你以为呢？当然是我派他去的。他身上带着杰佛·佛花被你那白灵咬断的手。我命令他搭船去君临，将手呈报给那小鬼头国王看看，这总该吸引乔佛里的注意吧……何况艾里沙爵士出身既好，又是正式册封的骑士，朝廷里也有旧识，应该不至于像其他穿黑衣的‘乌鸦’弟兄般受到冷落。”
“Yes, my lord.” Jon slid the sword back into the silver-banded scabbard. If not the blade he would have chosen, it was nonetheless a noble gift, and freeing him from Alliser Thorne’s malignance was nobler still.
“乌鸦！”琼恩觉得乌鸦的口气有些愤慨。
The Old Bear scratched at his chin. “I had forgotten how much a new beard itches,” he said. “Well, no help for that. Is that hand of yours healed enough to resume your duties?”
“总之呢，”总司令不理会乌鸦的抗议，续道，“如此一来你和他就自然隔开了几千里，也不显得我偏袒。”他伸出一根指头指着琼恩的脸。“但是，别以为这代表我赞同你在大厅里胡来。勇气虽然可以弥补相当程度的愚蠢，但无论你几岁，都不是小孩子了。这是把成年人的剑，也只有成年人才配用它。我希望你好自为之。”
“Yes, my lord.”
“是，大人。”琼恩把剑收回镶银边的剑鞘。虽说这并非他梦想的剑，但依然是件贵重的礼物，而将他自艾里沙·索恩的恶意侮辱之中释放出来，更是高贵之举。
“Good. The night will be cold, I’ll want hot spice wine. Find me a flagon of red, not too sour, and don’t skimp on the spices. And tell Hobb that if he sends me boiled mutton again I’m like to boil him . That last haunch was grey. Even the bird wouldn’t touch it.” He stroked the raven’s head with his thumb, and the bird made a contented quorking sound. “Away with you. I’ve work to do.”
熊老搔搔下巴。“我都忘记刚长出来的胡子有多痒了。”他说，“唉，也罢。你的手能工作么？”
The guards smiled at him from their niches as he wound his way down the turret stair, carrying the sword in his good hand. “Sweet steel,” one man said. “You earned that, Snow,” another told him. Jon made himself smile back at them, but his heart was not in it. He knew he should be pleased, yet he did not feel it. His hand ached, and the taste of anger was in his mouth, though he could not have said who he was angry with or why.
“可以，大人。”
A half dozen of his friends were lurking outside when he left the King’s Tower, where Lord Commander Mormont now made his residence. They’d hung a target on the granary doors, so they could seem to be honing their skills as archers, but he knew lurkers when he saw them. No sooner did he emerge than Pyp called out, “Well, come about, let’s have a look.”
“那敢情好。今晚会很冷，我要喝点加料的热葡萄酒。帮我找瓶红的，不要太酸，香料也别省。还有，你去跟哈布说，他要是敢再给我送煮羊肉来，我就把他给煮了。上次的后腿肉整个是灰的，连鸟都不吃。”他用拇指搓搓乌鸦的头，鸟儿发出一声满足的咕噜。“你去吧，我还有事要忙。”
“At what?” Jon said.
他佩着宝剑走下高塔楼梯，站在壁龛里的守卫微笑着看他。“真是把好剑。”其中一人说。“雪诺，干得漂亮，”另一个人告诉他。琼恩逼自己也对他们微笑，然而他心底却没有笑意。他知道自己应该高兴，却怎么也高兴不起来。他的手隐隐作痛，口中有愤怒的味道，可他说不出自己究竟是对谁生气，或是为何生气。
Toad sidled close. “Your rosy butt cheeks, what else?”
如今莫尔蒙总司令改住国王塔，琼恩出塔时，发现五六个朋友正鬼鬼祟祟地等在外面。他们在谷仓门上挂了个箭靶，装作练习箭法，但他一眼就知道他们别有企图。他前脚刚落地，派普便叫道：“嘿，快过来让咱们瞧瞧吧！”
“The sword,” Grenn stated. “We want to see the sword.”
“瞧什么？”琼恩说。
Jon raked them with an accusing look. “You knew.”
陶德溜过来。“当然是你的红屁股啰，还有什么？”
Pyp grinned. “We’re not all as dumb as Grenn.”
“那把剑啦，”葛兰说，“我们想瞧瞧那把剑。”
“You are so,” insisted Grenn. “You’re dumber.”
琼恩用充满责难的眼光扫视他们。“原来你们都知道。”
Halder gave an apologetic shrug. “I helped Pate carve the stone for the pommel,” the builder said, “and your friend Sam bought the garnets in Mole’s Town.”
派普嘻嘻笑道：“我们可不像葛兰那么笨。”
“We knew even before that, though,” Grenn said. “Rudge has been helping Donal Noye in the forge. He was there when the Old Bear brought him the burnt blade.”
“你明明就笨，”葛兰坚持，“你比我还笨。”
“The sword!” Matt insisted. The others took up the chant. “The sword , the sword , the sword.”
霍德有些歉疚地耸耸肩。“剑尾的圆球是我和派特一起雕的，”这位工匠说，“红榴石则是你朋友山姆从鼹鼠村带回来的。”
Jon unsheathed Longclaw and showed it to them, turning it this way and that so they could admire it. The bastard blade glittered in the pale sunlight, dark and deadly. “Valyrian steel,” he declared solemnly, trying to sound as pleased and proud as he ought to have felt.
“我们知道得比那更早哩，”葛兰说。“路奇在唐纳·诺伊的锻炉那边帮忙，熊老拿烧坏的剑去的时候他刚好在场。”
“I heard of a man who had a razor made of Valyrian steel,” declared Toad. “He cut his head off trying to shave.”
“快把剑拿出来！”梅沙坚持。其他人也跟着起哄。“拿剑来！拿剑来！拿剑来！”
Pyp grinned. “The Night’s Watch is thousands of years old,” he said, “but I’ll wager Lord Snow’s the first brother ever honored for burning down the Lord Commander’s Tower.”
于是琼恩抽出长爪，左右旋转，让他们好好欣赏。长柄剑身在苍白的日光下闪着阴暗而致命的光泽。“这是瓦雷利亚钢呢。”他严肃地表示，努力装出应有的快乐和骄傲。
The others laughed, and even Jon had to smile. The fire he’d started had not, in truth, burned down that formidable stone tower, but it had done a fair job of gutting the interior of the top two floors, where the Old Bear had his chambers. No one seemed to mind that very much, since it had also destroyed Othor’s murderous corpse.
“我听说啊，从前有个人有把瓦雷利亚钢打的剃刀，”陶德说，“结果他刮胡子的时候把头给剃掉了。”
The other wight, the one-handed thing that had once been a ranger named Jafer Flowers, had also been destroyed, cut near to pieces by a dozen swords … but not before it had slain Ser Jaremy Rykker and four other men. Ser Jaremy had finished the job of hacking its head off, yet had died all the same when the headless corpse pulled his own dagger from its sheath and buried it in his bowels. Strength and courage did not avail much against foemen who would not fall because they were already dead; even arms and armor offered small protection.
派普嘿嘿一笑。“守夜人虽有几千年历史，”他说，“但我敢打赌，咱们雪诺大人肯定是头一个把司令塔给烧掉的人。”
That grim thought soured Jon’s fragile mood. “I need to see Hobb about the Old Bear’s supper,” he announced brusquely, sliding Longclaw back into its scabbard. His friends meant well, but they did not understand. It was not their fault, truly; they had not had to face Othor, they had not seen the pale glow of those dead blue eyes, had not felt the cold of those dead black fingers. Nor did they know of the fighting in the riverlands. How could they hope to comprehend? He turned away from them abruptly and strode off, sullen. Pyp called after him, but Jon paid him no mind.
众人哈哈大笑，连琼恩也忍俊不禁。其实他引起的那场火，并未当真烧毁那座坚实的石砌高塔，只是把塔顶两层楼的所有房间，也就是熊老的居所，给烧得一干二净。大家对于损失倒是不以为意，因为这场大火同时也烧毁了奥瑟的杀人死尸。
They had moved him back to his old cell in tumbledown Hardin’s Tower after the fire, and it was there he returned. Ghost was curled up asleep beside the door, but he lifted his head at the sound of Jon’s boots. The direwolf’s red eyes were darker than garnets and wiser than men. Jon knelt, scratched his ear, and showed him the pommel of the sword. “Look. It’s you.”
至于那个生前叫做杰佛·佛花，原本是游骑兵，后来只剩一只手的尸鬼，也被十几个弟兄剁成碎片……然而它却先杀死了杰瑞米·莱克爵士及其他四人。杰瑞米爵士本已砍下它的头，可依旧没能阻止无头尸鬼拔出他的匕首，深深插入他的肚腹。遇上早已死亡，怎么也不会倒下的敌人，无论力量还是勇气都没有太大用处；武器和护甲，所能提供的保护也殊为有限。
Ghost sniffed at his carved stone likeness and tried a lick. Jon smiled. “You’re the one deserves an honor,” he told the wolf … and suddenly he found himself remembering how he’d found him, that day in the late summer snow. They had been riding off with the other pups, but Jon had heard a noise and turned back, and there he was, white fur almost invisible against the drifts. He was all alone , he thought, apart from the others in the litter. He was different, so they drove him out .
这个悲惨的念头，使得琼恩原本脆弱的心绪更加恶劣。“我要去找哈布，请他安排熊老的晚餐。”他唐突地对大家宣布，然后将长爪插进剑鞘。他知道朋友们是一番好意，可惜他们不懂。这实在不能说是他们的错：他们用不着面对奥瑟，没有亲眼目睹那双死人蓝眼的惨白光芒，没能感受到死人黑手指的冰冷，自然更不关心三河流域的激烈战事。既然如此，又怎能期望他们了解呢？他唐突地转身，闷闷不乐地大步离去。派普在身后叫他，但琼恩没有理会。
“Jon?” He looked up. Samwell Tarly stood rocking nervously on his heels. His cheeks were red, and he was wrapped in a heavy fur cloak that made him look ready for hibernation.
火灾之后，他们让他搬回倾颓的哈丁塔，住在他以前那间旧石室里。当他回到房间，白灵正蜷缩在门边睡觉，但它一听见琼恩的靴子声，便抬起头来。冰原狼的红眼睛比红榴石还要沉暗，比人眼更睿智。琼恩蹲下来，搔搔它的耳朵，给它看剑尾的圆球。“看，是你呢。”
“Sam.” Jon stood. “What is it? Do you want to see the sword?” If the others had known, no doubt Sam did too.
白灵闻闻石雕，伸出舌头舔了一下。琼恩微笑着告诉小狼：“荣耀归你所有。”突然间，他回想起自己在晚夏的雪地里找到它的经过。当时他们带着其他小狼正要回去，可琼恩听见了别的声音，回头看去，只见雪地里的它一身白毛，几乎无从分辨。“它就孤身一个，”他心想，“离兄弟姐妹远远的。它与众不同，所以被它们赶走。”
The fat boy shook his head. “I was heir to my father’s blade once,” he said mournfully. “Heartsbane. Lord Randyll let me hold it a few times, but it always scared me. It was Valyrian steel, beautiful but so sharp I was afraid I’d hurt one of my sisters. Dickon will have it now.” He wiped sweaty hands on his cloak. “I … ah … Maester Aemon wants to see you.”
“琼恩？”他抬起头。两颊通红的山姆威尔·塔利站在面前，局促不安地发抖，全身紧紧裹在厚重的毛皮斗篷里，仿佛即将进入冬眠。
It was not time for his bandages to be changed. Jon frowned suspiciously. “Why?” he demanded. Sam looked miserable. That was answer enough. “You told him, didn’t you?” Jon said angrily. “You told him that you told me.”
“山姆，”琼恩起身。“怎么了？你也想看看那把剑么？”既然大家都知道，山姆自然不例外。
“I … he … Jon, I didn’t want to … he asked … I mean … I think he knew , he sees things no one else sees …”
胖男孩摇摇头。“我曾经是我父亲的宝剑传人，”他悲戚地说，“那把剑叫‘碎心’。蓝道大人让我拿过几回，可我每次都很害怕。剑是用瓦雷利亚钢铸成，美丽异常，也锋利异常，我怕会伤到妹妹们。现在狄肯是它的传人了。”他在斗篷上擦擦手汗。“我……嗯……伊蒙师傅要见你。”
“He’s blind,” Jon pointed out forcefully, disgusted. “I can find the way myself.” He left Sam standing there, openmouthed and quivering.
还不到换绷带的时间。琼恩狐疑地皱眉质问：“他找我做什么？”看着山姆可怜兮兮的模样，答案已经不问自明。“你跟他说了，是不是？”琼恩怒道，“你跟他说你告诉我了。”
He found Maester Aemon up in the rookery, feeding the ravens. Clydas was with him, carrying a bucket of chopped meat as they shuffled from cage to cage. “Sam said you wanted me?”
“我……他……琼恩，我不是故意的……是他问的……我的意思是说……我觉得他根本就知道，他看得见别人看不到的东西。”
The maester nodded. “I did indeed. Clydas, give Jon the bucket. Perhaps he will be kind enough to assist me.” The hunched, pink-eyed brother handed Jon the bucket and scurried down the ladder. “Toss the meat into the cages,” Aemon instructed him. “The birds will do the rest.”
“他的眼睛早就瞎了。”琼恩口气嫌恶地大嚷，“我自己认得路。”说完，他径自走开，留下目瞪口呆的山姆站在原地发抖。
Jon shifted the bucket to his right hand and thrust his left down into the bloody bits. The ravens began to scream noisily and fly at the bars, beating at the metal with night-black wings. The meat had been chopped into pieces no larger than a finger joint. He filled his fist and tossed the raw red morsels into the cage, and the squawking and squabbling grew hotter. Feathers flew as two of the larger birds fought over a choice piece. Quickly Jon grabbed a second handful and threw it in after the first. “Lord Mormont’s raven likes fruit and corn.”
伊蒙学士正在鸦巢里喂渡鸦，克莱达斯提着一桶肉片，跟着他在笼子间行进。“山姆说您有事找我？”
“He is a rare bird,” the maester said. “Most ravens will eat grain, but they prefer flesh. It makes them strong, and I fear they relish the taste of blood. In that they are like men … and like men, not all ravens are alike.”
学士点点头。“是我的意思。克莱达斯，请把桶子交给琼恩，或许他愿意好心地帮我个忙。”驼背红眼的弟兄将桶子递给琼恩，随后赶忙爬下梯子。“只管把肉丢进笼子，”伊蒙指点他。“鸟儿自己明白。”
Jon had nothing to say to that. He threw meat, wondering why he’d been summoned. No doubt the old man would tell him, in his own good time. Maester Aemon was not a man to be hurried.
琼恩将桶子换到右手，左手伸进血红的肉块。鸦群见状，纷纷发出嘈杂的尖叫，在铁栏里飞来飞去，拍动漆黑如夜的翅膀击打着金属鸟笼。肉被切成比指节大不了多少的小碎块，他抓起满满一把血红肉片丢进笼中，尖叫和振翅声立刻愈演愈烈。两只体型较大的渡鸦为了争夺一块上好的肉，彼此厮打起来，一时之间羽毛纷飞。琼恩赶忙又抓一把，丢给其中一只。“莫尔蒙大人的乌鸦喜欢吃水果和玉米。”
“Doves and pigeons can also be trained to carry messages,” the maester went on, “though the raven is a stronger flyer, larger, bolder, far more clever, better able to defend itself against hawks … yet ravens are black, and they eat the dead, so some godly men abhor them. Baelor the Blessed tried to replace all the ravens with doves, did you know?” The maester turned his white eyes on Jon, smiling. “The Night’s Watch prefers ravens.”
“那是只很罕见的鸟，”学士道：“大部分的乌鸦虽然也吃谷子，但还是偏好肉类。这不光能让它们强壮，恐怕它们生性就嗜血。在这点上，它们和人类倒是挺像……所以，和人一样，乌鸦的个性也不全然相同。”
Jon’s fingers were in the bucket, blood up to the wrist. “Dywen says the wildlings call us crows,” he said uncertainly.
琼恩接不上话，只好继续丢肉，不禁纳闷自己为何会被找来。也罢，等老人家觉得时机适当，自然会告诉他。伊蒙学士这个人可是催不得的。
“The crow is the raven’s poor cousin. They are both beggars in black, hated and misunderstood.”
“鸽子虽然也可以训练来递送讯息，”学士续道，“但我们用来送信的渡鸦不仅强健，体型大，胆子壮，聪明得多，遇上老鹰也更有能力自卫……然而渡鸦色黑，又以尸体为食，因此有些信仰虔诚的人憎恨它们。你可知道，‘受神祝福的’贝勒曾试图用鸽子全面取代渡鸦？当然，他没有成功。”老师傅面露微笑，将那双白色盲眼转向琼恩。“只有守夜人比较喜欢渡鸦。”
Jon wished he understood what they were talking about, and why. What did he care about ravens and doves? If the old man had something to say to him, why couldn’t he just say it?
琼恩的手指浸在桶子里，血淹及腕。“我听戴文说，野人也把我们叫做乌鸦。”
“Jon, did you ever wonder why the men of the Night’s Watch take no wives and father no children?” Maester Aemon asked.
“乌鸦是渡鸦的可怜远亲。它们是一身黑羽的乞食者，向来受到误解，遭人怨恨。”
Jon shrugged. “No.” He scattered more meat. The fingers of his left hand were slimy with blood, and his right throbbed from the weight of the bucket.
琼恩真希望自己能清楚他到底在讲些什么，以及其中缘由。渡鸦和鸽子与他何干？如果老人家有话要说，为何不肯直截了当？
“So they will not love,” the old man answered, “for love is the bane of honor, the death of duty.”
“琼恩，你可曾想过，为何守夜人不娶妻也不生子？”伊蒙学士问。
That did not sound right to Jon, yet he said nothing. The maester was a hundred years old, and a high officer of the Night’s Watch; it was not his place to contradict him.
琼恩耸耸肩。“我没想过。”他又丢了些碎肉。此时他的左手已经沾满黏滑血渍，右手则因木桶的重量而隐隐作痛。
The old man seemed to sense his doubts. “Tell me, Jon, if the day should ever come when your lord father must needs choose between honor on the one hand and those he loves on the other, what would he do?”
“只因如此一来，他们才不会为情爱所困扰，”老师傅自问自答，“情爱是荣誉的大敌，更是责任的大忌。”
Jon hesitated. He wanted to say that Lord Eddard would never dishonor himself, not even for love, yet inside a small sly voice whispered, He fathered a bastard, where was the honor in that? And your mother, what of his duty to her, he will not even say her name . “He would do whatever was right,” he said … ringingly, to make up for his hesitation. “No matter what.”
琼恩觉得不太对劲，但他没说什么。老学士年逾百岁，在守夜人军团里德高望重，他没资格去反驳他。
“Then Lord Eddard is a man in ten thousand. Most of us are not so strong. What is honor compared to a woman’s love? What is duty against the feel of a newborn son in your arms … or the memory of a brother’s smile? Wind and words. Wind and words. We are only human, and the gods have fashioned us for love. That is our great glory, and our great tragedy.
老人家似乎察觉了他的不以为然。“琼恩，你告诉我，假如有这么一天，你的父亲大人必须在荣誉和他所爱的人之间做出抉择，你想他会怎么做？”
“The men who formed the Night’s Watch knew that only their courage shielded the realm from the darkness to the north. They knew they must have no divided loyalties to weaken their resolve. So they vowed they would have no wives nor children.
琼恩迟疑了。他想说艾德公爵绝对不会做出有损名誉的事，即使为了情爱也不例外。然而他心中却有个狡诈的声音在悄悄低语：他有个私生子，这有何荣誉可言？还有你母亲啊，他负起过对她的责任吗？他连她的名字都不肯讲！“他会做他该做的事，”他刻意拖长音调，借此掩饰自己的犹豫不决。“不管那是什么。”
“Yet brothers they had, and sisters. Mothers who gave them birth, fathers who gave them names. They came from a hundred quarrelsome kingdoms, and they knew times may change, but men do not. So they pledged as well that the Night’s Watch would take no part in the battles of the realms it guarded.
“那么，艾德大人是万里挑一的人才。多数人不若他这么坚强。跟女人的情爱相比，荣誉算得了什么？当你怀抱初生幼儿……或是想起兄弟的笑容，责任又算得了什么？不过都是虚幻，都是空谈罢了。我们身为凡人，天上诸神使我们有能力去爱，那是对我们最美好的恩赐，却也是我们最深沉的悲哀。”
“They kept their pledge. When Aegon slew Black Harren and claimed his kingdom, Harren’s brother was Lord Commander on the Wall, with ten thousand swords to hand. He did not march. In the days when the Seven Kingdoms were seven kingdoms, not a generation passed that three or four of them were not at war. The Watch took no part. When the Andals crossed the narrow sea and swept away the kingdoms of the First Men, the sons of the fallen kings held true to their vows and remained at their posts. So it has always been, for years beyond counting. Such is the price of honor.
“守夜人军团的创建者深知他们的勇气是守护王国，抵抗北方黑暗势力的惟一屏障。他们深知自己不能分神他顾，否则决心必将动摇，所以他们誓不娶妻，誓不生子。”
“A craven can be as brave as any man, when there is nothing to fear. And we all do our duty, when there is no cost to it. How easy it seems then, to walk the path of honor. Yet soon or late in every man’s life comes a day when it is not easy, a day when he must choose.”
“然而人皆有父母，皆有兄弟姐妹。他们来自纷争不断的大小王国，也深知时局虽改，人性终究不变。于是他们立下誓言：守夜人守护王国，但绝不参与其中任何战役。”
Some of the ravens were still eating, long stringy bits of meat dangling from their beaks. The rest seemed to be watching him. Jon could feel the weight of all those tiny black eyes. “And this is my day … is that what you’re saying?”
“他们恪守誓言。当伊耿杀死黑心赫伦，夺其王国的时候，赫伦的兄弟正是长城守军总司令，手下有一万精兵，但他没有出兵。当七大王国依旧是七国分立的年代，任何一个时代，至少都有三四个国家彼此交战，但守夜人没有参战。当安达尔人渡海而来，横扫先民诸国，这些死去国王的子孙们依旧奉誓不渝，坚守岗位。千百年来，始终如一，这便是荣誉的代价。”
Maester Aemon turned his head and looked at him with those dead white eyes. It was as if he were seeing right into his heart. Jon felt naked and exposed. He took the bucket in both hands and flung the rest of the slops through the bars. Strings of meat and blood flew everywhere, scattering the ravens. They took to the air, shrieking wildly. The quicker birds snatched morsels on the wing and gulped them down greedily. Jon let the empty bucket clang to the floor.
“当一个人无所畏惧时，即便懦夫也能展现不输于人的勇气。当我们毋需付出代价时，自然都能尽忠职守。行走在这条荣耀的大道上，似乎是那么地容易。然而每个人的生命中迟早会遇到考验，那便是他必须抉择的时刻。”
The old man laid a withered, spotted hand on his shoulder. “It hurts, boy,” he said softly. “Oh, yes. Choosing … it has always hurt. And always will. I know.”
有些渡鸦还在吃，细细的肉丝悬挂在长喙边，不住摇晃。大多数乌鸦似乎都看着他。琼恩能感觉每一双细小的黑眼停在他身上的重量。“如今就是我要抉择的时刻……您的意思，是这样吗？”
“You don’t know,” Jon said bitterly. “No one knows. Even if I am his bastard, he’s still my father …”
伊蒙师傅转过头，用那双瞎了的白眼“看”着他，仿佛可以看透他的心。琼恩觉得自己赤裸裸的，什么都藏不住。他情不自禁地两手握起桶子，把剩下的碎肉全倒进笼里。肉条和血水，四处飞溅，渡鸦纷纷振翅散开，疯狂尖叫。动作快的在空中叼住肉条，贪婪地大口吞咽。琼恩松开手，任由空桶“咔啦”落地。
Maester Aemon sighed. “Have you heard nothing I’ve told you, Jon? Do you think you are the first?” He shook his ancient head, a gesture weary beyond words. “Three times the gods saw fit to test my vows. Once when I was a boy, once in the fullness of my manhood, and once when I had grown old. By then my strength was fled, my eyes grown dim, yet that last choice was as cruel as the first. My ravens would bring the news from the south, words darker than their wings, the ruin of my House, the death of my kin, disgrace and desolation. What could I have done, old, blind, frail? I was helpless as a suckling babe, yet still it grieved me to sit forgotten as they cut down my brother’s poor grandson, and his son, and even the little children …”
老人伸出一只枯槁而遍布斑点的手，放在他肩上。“孩子，这很痛苦，”他轻声说，“噢，可不是嘛，做出抉择……总是痛苦的。现在如此，以后依然。我知道。”
Jon was shocked to see the shine of tears in the old man’s eyes. “Who are you?” he asked quietly, almost in dread.
“不，你不知道。”琼恩苦涩地说，“没有人知道。就算我是他的私生子，他依旧是我父亲……”
A toothless smile quivered on the ancient lips. “Only a maester of the Citadel, bound in service to Castle Black and the Night’s Watch. In my order, we put aside our house names when we take our vows and don the collar.” The old man touched the maester’s chain that hung loosely around his thin, fleshless neck. “My father was Maekar, the First of his Name, and my brother Aegon reigned after him in my stead. My grandfather named me for Prince Aemon the Dragonknight, who was his uncle, or his father, depending on which tale you believe. Aemon, he called me …”
伊蒙师傅叹道：“琼恩，我刚才告诉你的，你难道都没听进去？你难道认为自己是第一个经历考验的人吗？”他摇摇苍老的头，那是个虚弱得难以形容的动作。“天上诸神为我的誓言设立过三次考验。一次在我年幼，一次我正值壮年，最后一次则在我步入老年之后。那时我已年老体衰，视力渐弱，然而面临的抉择如同第一次那般残酷。渡鸦从南方带来我家族灭亡的消息。黑色的翅膀，黑暗的消息。我的亲人死亡、名声扫地、景况凄凉。但我这个身体虚弱的瞎眼老人能做些什么呢？我像是襁褓中嗷嗷待哺的婴儿一般无助，可一旦想到自己坐在这里，置身事外，听任他们杀害我弟弟可怜的孙子，他的曾孙，还有那些无辜的孩儿……”
“Aemon … Targaryen?” Jon could scarcely believe it.
老人眼中晶莹的泪水，让琼恩惊骇得不能言语。“您究竟是谁？”他近乎恐惧地轻声问。
“Once,” the old man said. “Once. So you see, Jon, I do know … and knowing, I will not tell you stay or go . You must make that choice yourself, and live with it all the rest of your days. As I have.” His voice fell to a whisper. “As I have …”
那双老迈的唇微微牵起，露出一张无牙的嘴。“不过就是个自学城毕业，立誓为黑城堡与守夜人奉献心力的学士罢了。在我的组织里，每当我们立下誓言，戴起项链之时，便须抛弃原有的家族姓氏。”老人摸摸挂在自己削瘦脖子上的项链。“我的父亲是梅卡一世，在他之后，我的弟弟伊耿代替我继承王位。我的祖父为我取名伊蒙，用以纪念龙骑士伊蒙王子，也就是他的叔叔，或者他的父亲，看你相信哪个版本的故事。我原名……”
*DAENERYS
“伊蒙……‘坦格利安’？”琼恩简直不敢相信。
W hen the battle was done, Dany rode her silver through the fields of the dead. Her handmaids and the men of her khas came after, smiling and jesting among themselves.
“都是过去的事，”老人说：“过去的事了。所以，琼恩，你看，我的确是明白你的感受……正因为明白，所以我不会要求你留下或是离开。你必须自己做出这个抉择，然后一辈子与之相伴，就像我一样。”他的声音只剩呓语。“就像我一样……”
Dothraki hooves had torn the earth and trampled the rye and lentils into the ground, while arakhs and arrows had sown a terrible new crop and watered it with blood. Dying horses lifted their heads and screamed at her as she rode past. Wounded men moaned and prayed. Jaqqa rhan moved among them, the mercy men with their heavy axes, taking a harvest of heads from the dead and dying alike. After them would scurry a flock of small girls, pulling arrows from the corpses to fill their baskets. Last of all the dogs would come sniffing, lean and hungry, the feral pack that was never far behind the khalasar .
第六十二章 丹妮莉丝
The sheep had been dead longest. There seemed to be thousands of them, black with flies, arrow shafts bristling from each carcass. Khal Ogo’s riders had done that, Dany knew; no man of Drogo’s khalasar would be such a fool as to waste his arrows on sheep when there were shepherds yet to kill.
战事结束之后，丹妮骑着银马穿过遍野横尸，女仆和卡斯部众紧随其后，彼此嬉笑玩闹。
The town was afire, black plumes of smoke roiling and tumbling as they rose into a hard blue sky. Beneath broken walls of dried mud, riders galloped back and forth, swinging their long whips as they herded the survivors from the smoking rubble. The women and children of Ogo’s khalasar walked with a sullen pride, even in defeat and bondage; they were slaves now, but they seemed not to fear it. It was different with the townsfolk. Dany pitied them; she remembered what terror felt like. Mothers stumbled along with blank, dead faces, pulling sobbing children by the hand. There were only a few men among them, cripples and cowards and grandfathers.
大地为多斯拉克铁蹄撕裂，裸麦和扁豆都被踩进泥土，插在地上的亚拉克弯刀和箭支经过鲜血浇灌，成了新的可怕作物。她骑马走过战场，濒死的马儿抬头对她嘶鸣，伤者有的呻吟、有的祈祷。大批拿着重斧，专替伤者解脱的“贾卡朗”穿梭其间，从亡者和将死之人身上收割下数不清的人头。跑在他们后面的是一群小女孩，她们从尸体上拔取箭枝，装进提篮，以备再次使用。最后则是削瘦饥饿但凶猛的狗群，它们闻闻嗅嗅，永远跟随卡拉萨。
Ser Jorah said the people of this country named themselves the Lhazareen, but the Dothraki called them haesh rakhi , the Lamb Men. Once Dany might have taken them for Dothraki, for they had the same copper skin and almond-shaped eyes. Now they looked alien to her, squat and flat-faced, their black hair cropped unnaturally short. They were herders of sheep and eaters of vegetables, and Khal Drogo said they belonged south of the river bend. The grass of the Dothraki sea was not meant for sheep.
羊群最早死去，似乎有几千只之多，它们身上插满了箭，羽毛竖立在尸体之上。丹妮知道这一定是奥戈卡奥的的部队干的；卓戈的卡拉萨绝不会如此愚蠢，在没杀掉牧羊人之前，就把箭浪费在羊身上。
Dany saw one boy bolt and run for the river. A rider cut him off and turned him, and the others boxed him in, cracking their whips in his face, running him this way and that. One galloped behind him, lashing him across the buttocks until his thighs ran red with blood. Another snared his ankle with a lash and sent him sprawling. Finally, when the boy could only crawl, they grew bored of the sport and put an arrow through his back.
城镇起火燃烧，缕缕黑烟腾涌翻滚，直上湛蓝的天空。在倾颓的干泥土墙下，骑马战士往来奔驰，挥舞手中长鞭，驱策生还者离开冒烟的废墟。奥戈卡拉萨的女人和小孩即便战败、即使被人奴役，走起路来依旧有种愠怒的自尊；他们如今沦为奴隶，却似乎勇敢地接受自己的命运。当地镇民就不一样了。丹妮深深地怜悯他们，她清楚地记得恐惧的滋味。许多母亲面无表情，死气沉沉，步伐踉跄地拉着啜泣不停的孩子。他们之中仅有少数男性，多半是残废、懦夫和祖父辈的老人。
Ser Jorah met her outside the shattered gate. He wore a dark green surcoat over his mail. His gauntlets, greaves, and greathelm were dark grey steel. The Dothraki had mocked him for a coward when he donned his armor, but the knight had spit insults right back in their teeth, tempers had flared, longsword had clashed with arakh , and the rider whose taunts had been loudest had been left behind to bleed to death.
乔拉爵士曾说，这个地方的人自称拉札林人，但多斯拉克人唤他们作“赫西拉奇”，意思是“羊人”。若是从前，丹妮可能会把他们错当成多斯拉克人，因为他们同样有着古铜色皮肤和杏仁形的眼睛。但如今他们在她眼中显得殊异：扁脸、粗矮，黑发剪得异常地短。他们牧养羊群，种植作物，卓戈卡奥说他们的活动范围一直在多斯拉克海边沿的大河以南，因为多斯拉克海的草不是给羊吃的。
Ser Jorah lifted the visor of his flat-topped greathelm as he rode up. “Your lord husband awaits you within the town.”
丹妮看到一个男孩健步奔向河畔，一名骑马战士阻断他的来路，逼他转身，其余的人则把他围在中间，扬鞭抽打他的脸，驱策他四处逃窜。又一名战士快马跑到他背后，不停鞭打他的臀部，直到鲜血染红了他的大腿。还有一人挥鞭勾住他的脚踝，使之扑倒在地。最后，那男孩只能坚持爬行，他们觉得无聊，便一箭射穿他的背。
“Drogo took no harm?”
乔拉爵士在崩毁的城门外迎接她。他在盔甲外罩了一件暗绿色罩袍。他的铁手套、护膝和巨盔都是深灰色精钢打造。当他穿上盔甲时，多斯拉克人嘲笑他是胆小鬼，这名骑士立刻骂了回去，双方一言不合，长剑与亚拉克弯刀交击的结果，那个嘲笑最大声的多斯拉克武士被丢在后方，流血至死。
“A few cuts,” Ser Jorah answered, “nothing of consequence. He slew two khals this day. Khal Ogo first, and then the son, Fogo, who became khal when Ogo fell. His bloodriders cut the bells from their hair, and now Khal Drogo’s every step rings louder than before.”
乔拉爵士骑上前来，揭开平顶巨盔的面罩。“您的夫君在镇里等您。”
Ogo and his son had shared the high bench with her lord husband at the naming feast where Viserys had been crowned, but that was in Vaes Dothrak, beneath the Mother of Mountains, where every rider was a brother and all quarrels were put aside. It was different out in the grass. Ogo’s khalasar had been attacking the town when Khal Drogo caught him. She wondered what the Lamb Men had thought, when they first saw the dust of their horses from atop those cracked-mud walls. Perhaps a few, the younger and more foolish who still believed that the gods heard the prayers of desperate men, took it for deliverance.
“卓戈没受伤吧？”
Across the road, a girl no older than Dany was sobbing in a high thin voice as a rider shoved her over a pile of corpses, facedown, and thrust himself inside her. Other riders dismounted to take their turns. That was the sort of deliverance the Dothraki brought the Lamb Men.
“有点皮肉伤，”乔拉爵士答道，“不碍事。今天他亲手杀了两个卡奥，先是奥戈卡奥，随后是他的儿子佛戈，因为父亲死后他便成为新的卡奥。卓戈卡奥的血盟卫割下那两人发问的铃铛，如今他走起路来比以前更是响声大作了。”
I am the blood of the dragon , Daenerys Targaryen reminded herself as she turned her face away. She pressed her lips together and hardened her heart and rode on toward the gate.
韦赛里斯被加冕的那场庆祝命名的宴会上，奥戈父子曾与她的丈夫并肩而坐，把酒言欢。但那是在维斯·多斯拉克，在圣母山的阴影下，在那里，每位草原马民都是手足兄弟，一切纷争都被搁置一边。到了大草原上就不一样了。奥戈的卡拉萨原本正攻击这座城镇，却被卓戈卡奥打了个措手不及。她不知羊人初次从龟裂的泥墙上方，看到卓戈卡拉萨的马匹扬起的烟尘时，心里作何感想。或许有几个年纪较轻、天真愚昧的人当真以为，天上诸神究竟听见了绝望之人的祈求，为他们派来救赎了吧。
“Most of Ogo’s riders fled,” Ser Jorah was saying. “Still, there may be as many as ten thousand captives.”
道路对面，有个年纪比丹妮大不了多少的女孩，正以高亢尖细的声音啜泣，一名战士将她推倒在一堆尸体上，面孔朝下，当场施暴。其他战士也纷纷下马，轮流享乐。这就是多斯拉克人带给羊人的救赎。
Slaves , Dany thought. Khal Drogo would drive them downriver to one of the towns on Slaver’s Bay. She wanted to cry, but she told herself that she must be strong. This is war, this is what it looks like, this is the price of the Iron Throne .
我是真龙传人，丹妮莉丝·坦格利安一边转开脸，一边提醒自己。她抿紧嘴唇，硬起心肠，骑马朝城门走去。
“I’ve told the khal he ought to make for Meereen,” Ser Jorah said. “They’ll pay a better price than he’d get from a slaving caravan. Illyrio writes that they had a plague last year, so the brothels are paying double for healthy young girls, and triple for boys under ten. If enough children survive the journey, the gold will buy us all the ships we need, and hire men to sail them.”
“奥戈的大部分战士都逃了，”乔拉爵士道，“即便如此，仍有一万名左右的俘虏。”
Behind them, the girl being raped made a heartrending sound, a long sobbing wail that went on and on and on. Dany’s hand clenched hard around the reins, and she turned the silver’s head. “Make them stop,” she commanded Ser Jorah.
是一万名奴隶，丹妮心想。卓戈卡奥将把这些人顺着大河，驱赶到下游奴隶湾的城镇去。她好想哭，但她告诉自己必须坚强。这是战争，战争就是这样，这是为夺回铁王座所必须付出的代价。
“Khaleesi?” The knight sounded perplexed.
“我建议卡奥去弥林，”乔拉爵士道，“那里开的价比奴隶商队慷慨得多。伊利里欧信上说，该城去年遭到瘟疫袭击，所以妓院愿付双倍的价钱购买健康的年轻女孩，十岁以下的小男生甚至是三倍的价钱。如果有足够的孩子撑过这趟旅程，所得的金子不但够我们买船，还足以雇水手。”
“You heard my words,” she said. “Stop them.” She spoke to her khas in the harsh accents of Dothraki. “Jhogo, Quaro, you will aid Ser Jorah. I want no rape.”
身后，被轮暴的女孩发出令人心碎的声音，那是一声长长的抽噎，无止尽地持续下去。丹妮紧握缰绳，调转马头。“叫他们住手。”她命令乔拉爵士。
The warriors exchanged a baffled look.
“卡丽熙？”骑士似乎有些为难。
Jorah Mormont spurred his horse closer. “Princess,” he said, “you have a gentle heart, but you do not understand. This is how it has always been. Those men have shed blood for the khal . Now they claim their reward.”
“你听到了我的命令。”她说，“叫他们住手。”她改用多斯拉克语对卡斯部众下令，口气尖锐，“乔戈、魁洛，你们协助乔拉爵士，我不要见到强暴发生。”
Across the road, the girl was still crying, her high singsong tongue strange to Dany’s ears. The first man was done with her now, and a second had taken his place.
两个战士交换着困惑的眼神。
“She is a lamb girl,” Quaro said in Dothraki. “She is nothing, Khaleesi . The riders do her honor. The Lamb Men lay with sheep, it is known.”
乔拉·莫尔蒙爵士踢马靠近。“公主殿下，”他说，“您宅心仁厚，但恐怕有所不知，这里习俗向来如此。那些人为了卡奥流血卖命，如今是该他们取得奖赏的时候。”
“It is known,” her handmaid Irri echoed.
道路对面，女孩仍旧哭泣不止，她那种高亢有如歌唱的语言在丹妮耳中显得异样地陌生。头一个人已经完事，另一个正过来接替。
“It is known,” agreed Jhogo, astride the tall grey stallion that Drogo had given him. “If her wailing offends your ears, Khaleesi , Jhogo will bring you her tongue.” He drew his arakh .
“她是个羊女，”魁洛用多斯拉克语说，“卡丽熙，她什么也不是，和我们的战士在一起，是她的荣幸。羊人与羊交合，大家都知道。”
“I will not have her harmed,” Dany said. “I claim her. Do as I command you, or Khal Drogo will know the reason why.”
“大家都知道。”女仆伊丽应道。
“Ai, Khaleesi,” Jhogo replied, kicking his horse. Quaro and the others followed his lead, the bells in their hair chiming.
“大家都知道。”乔戈也同意。他骑着卓戈赐给他的那匹高大灰马。“卡丽熙，若她的哭嚎冒犯了您的耳朵，乔戈这就去把她的舌头给您带来。”说完他拔出亚拉克弯刀。
“Go with them,” she commanded Ser Jorah.
“我不要她受伤，”丹妮说，“这女孩我要定了。照我的命令去办，否则卓戈卡奥惟你是问。”
“As you command.” The knight gave her a curious look. “You are your brother’s sister, in truth.”
“唉，卡丽熙。”乔戈说完一踢马肚，魁洛和其他人也跟着过去，发际铃铛轻声作响。
“Viserys?” She did not understand.
“你也去。”她命令乔拉爵士。
“No,” he answered. “Rhaegar.” He galloped off.
“如您所愿。”骑士眼神古怪地看了她一眼。“你果真是你哥哥的妹妹。”
Dany heard Jhogo shout. The rapers laughed at him. One man shouted back. Jhogo’s arakh flashed, and the man’s head went tumbling from his shoulders. Laughter turned to curses as the horsemen reached for weapons, but by then Quaro and Aggo and Rakharo were there. She saw Aggo point across the road to where she sat upon her silver. The riders looked at her with cold black eyes. One spat. The others scattered to their mounts, muttering.
“韦赛里斯？”她不懂。
All the while the man atop the lamb girl continued to plunge in and out of her, so intent on his pleasure that he seemed unaware of what was going on around him. Ser Jorah dismounted and wrenched him off with a mailed hand. The Dothraki went sprawling in the mud, bounced up with a knife in hand, and died with Aggo’s arrow through his throat. Mormont pulled the girl off the pile of corpses and wrapped her in his blood-spattered cloak. He led her across the road to Dany. “What do you want done with her?”
“不，”他回答，“雷加。”他策马驰去。
The girl was trembling, her eyes wide and vague. Her hair was matted with blood. “Doreah, see to her hurts. You do not have a rider’s look, perhaps she will not fear you. The rest, with me.” She urged the silver through the broken wooden gate.
丹妮听见乔戈大叫。施暴者们嘲笑他，有个人甚至吼了回去。乔戈的亚拉克弯刀一闪，那人的头便从肩膀滚落地面。笑声转为咒骂，那些人纷纷抽出武器，然而这时魁洛、阿戈和拉卡洛也已赶到。她见路那边的阿戈指指骑在银马上的她，那些战士用冰冷的黑眼睛瞪着她，其中一人啐了口唾沫，其他人则回去骑马，嘴里念念有词。
It was worse inside the town. Many of the houses were afire, and the jaqqa rhan had been about their grisly work. Headless corpses filled the narrow, twisty lanes. They passed other women being raped. Each time Dany reined up, sent her khas to make an end to it, and claimed the victim as slave. One of them, a thick-bodied, flat-nosed woman of forty years, blessed Dany haltingly in the Common Tongue, but from the others she got only flat black stares. They were suspicious of her, she realized with sadness; afraid that she had saved them for some worse fate.
与此同时，骑在羊女身上的人依旧努力运作，全神贯注于他的享乐，对周遭事物毫无所觉。乔拉爵士下马，伸出戴铁手套的手将他硬生生拧开。那多斯拉克人摔在泥地上，翻身跳起，手握短刀，旋即被阿戈一箭封喉。莫尔蒙将女孩自尸堆上拉起来，解下自己血迹斑斑的披风为之披上，然后领她穿过道路，走到丹妮面前。“您要怎么处置她？”
“You cannot claim them all, child,” Ser Jorah said, the fourth time they stopped, while the warriors of her khas herded her new slaves behind her.
女孩睁大眼睛，神情恍惚，浑身颤抖。她的头发因鲜血而纠结。“多莉亚，把她的伤处理一下。你不是本族的人，或许她不会怕你。其他人，跟我来。”她驱策银马。穿过崩毁的木城门。
“I am khaleesi , heir to the Seven Kingdoms, the blood of the dragon,” Dany reminded him. “It is not for you to tell me what I cannot do.” Across the city, a building collapsed in a great gout of fire and smoke, and she heard distant screams and the wailing of frightened children.
镇上的情形比外面更惨，无数房舍着火燃烧。“贾卡朗”往返忙碌，进行他们的血腥工作，狭窄曲折的巷道里塞满了无头尸体。途中，他们时时见到女人被强暴，每次丹妮都勒住缰绳，派卡斯部众上前制止，并收被害者为自己的奴隶。其中一个肥胖、扁鼻、约四十来岁的妇人用生硬的通用语祝福丹妮，但其他人眼中只有怨毒的瞪视。她们怀疑她，她哀伤地明白，害怕她会将她们带往更悲惨的命运。
They found Khal Drogo seated before a square windowless temple with thick mud walls and a bulbous dome like some immense brown onion. Beside him was a pile of heads taller than he was. One of the short arrows of the Lamb Men stuck through the meat of his upper arm, and blood covered the left side of his bare chest like a splash of paint. His three bloodriders were with him.
“孩子，你没法把她们通通收为己有的。”当他们第四次停下，看着卡斯部众把新的一批奴隶带到她身后，乔拉爵士忍不住道。
Jhiqui helped Dany dismount; she had grown clumsy as her belly grew larger and heavier. She knelt before the khal . “My sun-and-stars is wounded.” The arakh cut was wide but shallow; his left nipple was gone, and a flap of bloody flesh and skin dangled from his chest like a wet rag.
“我是卡丽熙，是七大王国的继承人，也是真龙传人。”丹妮提醒他。“你没资格告诉我什么不能做。”城市彼方，一座建筑在烈火和浓烟中轰然倒塌，她听见远处传来尖叫和孩童惊怕的呜咽。
“Is scratch, moon of life, from arakh of one bloodrider to Khal Ogo,” Khal Drogo said in the Common Tongue. “I kill him for it, and Ogo too.” He turned his head, the bells in his braid ringing softly. “Is Ogo you hear, and Fogo his khalakka , who was khal when I slew him.”
他们找到卓戈时，他正坐在一座无窗的方形神庙前，那庙宇有厚厚的泥墙和球茎状的圆顶，宛如一个巨大的褐色洋葱。在他身边，是一堆人头，叠得比他还高。他的上臂插了一枝羊人的短箭，赤裸的左胸一片血红，像是泼洒了颜料。他的三个血盟卫悉数在场。
“No man can stand before the sun of my life,” Dany said, “the father of the stallion who mounts the world.”
姬琪搀扶丹妮下马；随着肚子越来越大，她的躯体越显沉重，行动日渐笨拙。她在卡奥面前跪下。“我的日和星受伤了。”亚拉克弯刀所留的伤口虽然很长，幸而割得不深；他的左边乳头不见踪影，一片血淋淋的皮肉垂在胸前，活如一块湿润的破布。
A mounted warrior rode up and vaulted from his saddle. He spoke to Haggo, a stream of angry Dothraki too fast for Dany to understand. The huge bloodrider gave her a heavy look before he turned to his khal . “This one is Mago, who rides in the khas of Ko Jhaqo. He says the khaleesi has taken his spoils, a daughter of the lambs who was his to mount.”
“这是擦伤，我生命中的月亮，来自奥戈卡奥的血盟卫。”卓戈卡奥说。“为此我杀了他，也杀了奥戈。”他扭扭头，发辫上的铃铛轻声作响。“你听到的是奥戈，还有他的卡拉喀佛戈，当我杀他的时候，他是卡奥。”
Khal Drogo’s face was still and hard, but his black eyes were curious as they went to Dany. “Tell me the truth of this, moon of my life,” he commanded in Dothraki.
“无人能抵挡我生命中的太阳，”丹妮说，“他是骑着世界的骏马之父。”
Dany told him what she had done, in his own tongue so the khal would understand her better, her words simple and direct.
这时，一名战士骑马而至，翻身下鞍，愤怒地用多斯拉克语对哈戈讲了一大串话，由于速度太快，丹妮听不懂。高大的血盟卫沉重地看了她一眼，这才转向卡奥。“这是马戈，贾科寇①的卡斯部众。他说卡丽熙抢走了他的战利品，一个应该让他骑的羔羊之女。”
When she was done, Drogo was frowning. “This is the way of war. These women are our slaves now, to do with as we please.”
卓戈卡奥转向丹妮，脸上的表情凝重而坚毅，但那双黑眼睛里却流露出疑问。“我生命中的月亮，告诉我实话。”他用多斯拉克语下令。
“It pleases me to hold them safe,” Dany said, wondering if she had dared too much. “If your warriors would mount these women, let them take them gently and keep them for wives. Give them places in the khalasar and let them bear you sons.”
丹妮用卡奥的母语，简练而直接地说出事情经过，好让他了解清楚。
Qotho was ever the cruelest of the bloodriders. It was he who laughed. “Does the horse breed with the sheep?”
说完之后，卓戈皱起眉头。“战争就是这样，眼下这些女人是我们的奴隶，随我们高兴摆布。”
Something in his tone reminded her of Viserys. Dany turned on him angrily. “The dragon feeds on horse and sheep alike.”
“那我高兴让她们平安。”丹妮说，一边怀疑自己是否太过火了。“若你的战士要骑这些女人，请他们温柔地骑，并将她们收作妻子，让她们在卡拉萨中占有一席之地，为你们生儿育女。”
Khal Drogo smiled. “See how fierce she grows!” he said. “It is my son inside her, the stallion who mounts the world, filling her with his fire. Ride slowly, Qotho … if the mother does not burn you where you sit, the son will trample you into the mud. And you, Mago, hold your tongue and find another lamb to mount. These belong to my khaleesi.” He started to reach out a hand to Daenerys, but as he lifted his arm Drogo grimaced in sudden pain and turned his head.
柯索向来是三名血盟卫中最残忍的一个，这时他冷笑道：“马会和羊交配吗？”
Dany could almost feel his agony. The wounds were worse than Ser Jorah had led her to believe. “Where are the healers?” she demanded. The khalasar had two sorts: barren women and eunuch slaves. The herbwomen dealt in potions and spells, the eunuchs in knife, needle, and fire. “Why do they not attend the khal?”
他语气中的某种元素令她想起韦赛里斯。于是丹妮转头怒道：“马和羊都是龙的食物。”
“The khal sent the hairless men away, Khaleesi,” old Cohollo assured her. Dany saw the bloodrider had taken a wound himself; a deep gash in his left shoulder.
卓戈卡奥露出微笑。“看她变得多凶猛！”他说，“这都是因为我的儿子，骑着世界的骏马，在她体内，让她充满火焰。柯索，你小心……就算母亲不把你烧死，儿子也会把你踩进地底。至于你，马戈，闭上你的嘴巴，去找别的羊骑。这些人属于我的卡丽熙。”卓戈朝丹妮莉丝伸出手，没想刚抬手臂就痛得皱眉转头。
“Many riders are hurt,” Khal Drogo said stubbornly. “Let them be healed first. This arrow is no more than the bite of a fly, this little cut only a new scar to boast of to my son.”
丹妮几乎可以感受他的痛苦，这些伤远比乔拉爵士形容的严重。“医者在哪里？”她质问。卡拉萨里有两种人专事医疗：不孕的妇女和奴隶太监。草药妇人以药水和符咒疗伤，太监则用尖刀、针线和烈火。“为何无人替卡奥疗伤？”
Dany could see the muscles in his chest where the skin had been cut away. A trickle of blood ran from the arrow that pierced his arm. “It is not for Khal Drogo to wait,” she proclaimed. “Jhogo, seek out these eunuchs and bring them here at once.”
“卡丽熙，是卡奥把无毛人遣走的。”老科霍罗告诉她。丹妮发现血盟卫自己也受了伤，左肩有一道极深的刀痕。
“Silver Lady,” a woman’s voice said behind her, “I can help the Great Rider with his hurts.”
“有很多战士受伤，”卓戈卡奥固执地说，“就让他们先接受治疗。这枝箭和苍蝇叮咬没什么两样，而这个小刀伤，只不过是另一个我可以向儿子炫耀的疤痕。”
Dany turned her head. The speaker was one of the slaves she had claimed, the heavy, flat-nosed woman who had blessed her.
丹妮看到他胸膛被割裂的皮肤下的肌肉，他的箭伤则血流如注。“不能让卓戈卡奥等，”她宣布，“乔戈，找到太监，把他们立刻带来。”
“The khal needs no help from women who lie with sheep,” barked Qotho. “Aggo, cut out her tongue.”
“银夫人，”身后传来一个女性的声音。“我可以帮伟大的骑马战士疗伤。”
Aggo grabbed her hair and pressed a knife to her throat.
丹妮转头，开口的人是她解救的一名奴隶，就是那个祝福她的肥胖扁鼻妇人。
Dany lifted a hand. “No. She is mine. Let her speak.”
“卡奥不需要跟羊交配的女人帮忙。”柯索大喝一声，“阿戈，割下她的舌头！”
Aggo looked from her to Qotho. He lowered his knife.
阿戈一把扯住她的头发，将匕首往她喉咙按去。
“I meant no wrong, fierce riders.” The woman spoke Dothraki well. The robes she wore had once been the lightest and finest of woolens, rich with embroidery, but now they were mud-caked and bloody and ripped. She clutched the torn cloth of her bodice to her heavy breasts. “I have some small skill in the healing arts.”
丹妮举手制止。“住手，她是我的人。让她说。”
“Who are you?” Dany asked her.
“勇猛的骑马战士啊，我没有恶意。”这女人的多斯拉克语很流利。她穿的长袍原本是极轻薄的上等羊毛制成，织有繁复的图案，如今却沾满泥土和血迹，扯得破烂。她抓紧褴褛的衣裳，遮住硕大的乳房。“我真的懂得一点医术。”
“I am named Mirri Maz Duur. I am godswife of this temple.”
“你是做什么的？”丹妮问她。
“Maegi,” grunted Haggo, fingering his arakh . His look was dark. Dany remembered the word from a terrifying story that Jhiqui had told her one night by the cookfire. A maegi was a woman who lay with demons and practiced the blackest of sorceries, a vile thing, evil and soulless, who came to men in the dark of night and sucked life and strength from their bodies.
“我叫弥丽·马兹·笃尔，是这座神庙的女祭司。”
“I am a healer,” Mirri Maz Duur said.
“巫魔女。”哈戈咕哝道，一边玩弄着手中的亚拉克弯刀，眼神阴沉。丹妮回忆起某日晚间姬琪在营火边说的恐怖故事：巫魔女是专与恶魔交媾，施行最黑暗恐怖的妖术，邪恶残忍而无灵魂的女人。她们到了夜间会寻找男性，吸干他们的精力，直到对方死亡为止。
“A healer of sheeps,” sneered Qotho. “Blood of my blood, I say kill this maegi and wait for the hairless men.”
“我只是个医者。”弥丽·马兹·笃尔说。
Dany ignored the bloodrider’s outburst. This old, homely, thick-bodied woman did not look like a maegi to her. “Where did you learn your healing, Mirri Maz Duur?”
“羊的医者。”柯索轻蔑地说，“吾血之血，我说杀了这个巫魔女，等无毛人来。”
“My mother was godswife before me, and taught me all the songs and spells most pleasing to the Great Shepherd, and how to make the sacred smokes and ointments from leaf and root and berry. When I was younger and more fair, I went in caravan to Asshai by the Shadow, to learn from their mages. Ships from many lands come to Asshai, so I lingered long to study the healing ways of distant peoples. A moonsinger of the Jogos Nhai gifted me with her birthing songs, a woman of your own riding people taught me the magics of grass and corn and horse, and a maester from the Sunset Lands opened a body for me and showed me all the secrets that hide beneath the skin.”
丹妮不理会暴跳的血盟卫。在她看来，眼前这个年老丑陋的胖女人怎么也不像是巫魔女。“弥丽·马兹·笃尔，你的医术从哪里学来？”
Ser Jorah Mormont spoke up. “A maester?”
“我母亲是从前的女祭司，她教我学会取悦至高牧神的歌曲和咒语，以及如何用树叶、树根和浆果调制圣烟和圣膏。当我年轻貌美的时候，曾跟随商队，前往阴影之旁的亚夏，希望向他们的魔法师讨教。无数国度的船只都在亚夏汇集，于是我在当地长期逗留，学习异邦民族的医疗之术。一位来自鸠格斯奈的月之歌者教我她的分娩之歌，一位你们骑马民族的女人则教我属于青草、玉米和马匹的魔法，更有一位来自日落之地的学士剖开尸体，告诉我埋藏于皮肤之下的所有奥秘。”
“Marwyn, he named himself,” the woman replied in the Common Tongue. “From the sea. Beyond the sea. The Seven Lands, he said. Sunset Lands. Where men are iron and dragons rule. He taught me this speech.”
乔拉·莫尔蒙爵士开口：“学士？”
“A maester in Asshai,” Ser Jorah mused. “Tell me, Godswife, what did this Marwyn wear about his neck?”
“他自称马尔温，”女人回答，“从汪洋彼端的七国之地乘船而来。那里是日落国度，人们穿着铁衣，被巨龙所统治。他教会了我他家乡的语言。”
“A chain so tight it was like to choke him, Iron Lord, with links of many metals.”
“学士竟会出现在亚夏？”乔拉爵士若有所思地说，“告诉我，女祭司，这位马尔温的脖子上戴了什么？”
The knight looked at Dany. “Only a man trained in the Citadel of Oldtown wears such a chain,” he said, “and such men do know much of healing.”
“铁大王，他戴了一条用多种金属串成的项链，非常紧，像要把他掐死。”
“Why should you want to help my khal?”
骑士看看丹妮。“只有在旧镇的学城受训的人才会戴这种项链，”他说，“而这种人的确精通医术。”
“All men are one flock, or so we are taught,” replied Mirri Maz Duur. “The Great Shepherd sent me to earth to heal his lambs, wherever I might find them.”
“你为什么要帮助我的卡奥？”
Qotho gave her a stinging slap. “We are no sheep, maegi.”
“所有的人都属于同一群羊羔，我所接受的教育这么告诉我。”弥丽·马兹·笃尔回答，“至高牧神派遣我下凡医治他的羔羊，不论何时何地。”
“Stop it,” Dany said angrily. “She is mine. I will not have her harmed.”
柯索“啪”一声，抽了她一记耳光。“巫魔女，我们不是羊。”
Khal Drogo grunted. “The arrow must come out, Qotho.”
“住手！”丹妮怒道，“她是我的人，不许你伤害她。”
“Yes, Great Rider,” Mirri Maz Duur answered, touching her bruised face. “And your breast must be washed and sewn, lest the wound fester.”
卓戈卡奥闷哼一声。“柯索，这枝箭总得弄出来。”
“Do it, then,” Khal Drogo commanded.
“是的，伟大的骑马战士。”弥丽·马兹·笃尔答道，一边抚着自己淤伤的脸颊。“而您的胸伤也必须立刻清洗，然后缝补．不然会化脓的。”
“Great Rider,” the woman said, “my tools and potions are inside the god’s house, where the healing powers are strongest.”
“那就快动手罢。”卓戈卡奥命令。
“I will carry you, blood of my blood,” Haggo offered.
“伟大的骑马战士啊，”那女人说：“我的用具和药剂都在神庙里面，那里的治疗之力最为强大。”
Khal Drogo waved him away. “I need no man’s help,” he said, in a voice proud and hard. He stood, unaided, towering over them all. A fresh wave of blood ran down his breast, from where Ogo’s arakh had cut off his nipple. Dany moved quickly to his side. “I am no man,” she whispered, “so you may lean on me.” Drogo put a huge hand on her shoulder. She took some of his weight as they walked toward the great mud temple. The three bloodriders followed. Dany commanded Ser Jorah and the warriors of her khas to guard the entrance and make certain no one set the building afire while they were still inside.
“吾血之血，我扶你进去。”哈戈提议。
They passed through a series of anterooms, into the high central chamber under the onion. Faint light shone down through hidden windows above. A few torches burnt smokily from sconces on the walls. Sheepskins were scattered across the mud floor. “There,” Mirri Maz Duur said, pointing to the altar, a massive blue-veined stone carved with images of shepherds and their flocks. Khal Drogo lay upon it. The old woman threw a handful of dried leaves onto a brazier, filling the chamber with fragrant smoke. “Best if you wait outside,” she told the rest of them.
卓戈卡奥把他挥开。“我不需要人帮忙，”他用骄傲而坚定的语气说。他不靠搀扶站了起来，比在场所有人都要高大。鲜血自他被奥戈血盟卫的亚拉克弯刀所割去的乳头处汩汩流下，丹妮赶忙走到他身边。“我不是男人，”她小声说，“靠在我身上吧。”卓戈伸出巨手搭住她的肩膀，她便这么扶着他朝泥砌神庙走去。三名血盟卫紧跟在后，丹妮命令乔拉爵士和她的卡斯部众守住神庙入口，确保他们出来之前不会有人来此纵火。
“We are blood of his blood,” Cohollo said. “Here we wait.”
他们穿过一连串的前厅，走进位于“洋葱”正下方的中央大堂。微弱的光线从上方隐蔽的窗户射入，墙上烛台里插了几支火把，正在冒烟燃烧。泥地上散乱地铺着羊皮。“躺在那里。”弥丽·马兹·笃尔指着祭坛说。那是一块巨大的蓝纹石板，上面刻画着牧羊人与羊群的图案。卓戈卡奥躺上去，老妇人在火盆里洒上一把干枯的叶子，房间顿时充满香烟。“你们最好到外面等。”她对其他人说。
Qotho stepped close to Mirri Maz Duur. “Know this, wife of the Lamb God. Harm the khal and you suffer the same.” He drew his skinning knife and showed her the blade.
“我们是他血之血，”科霍罗说，“我们在这里等。”
“She will do no harm.” Dany felt she could trust this old, plain-faced woman with her flat nose; she had saved her from the hard hands of her rapers, after all.
柯索走近弥丽·马兹·笃尔。“听好，羊神的祭司，你若敢伤害卡奥，就会有这样的下场。”他抽出剥皮用的猎刀，给她亮亮锋刃。
“If you must stay, then help,” Mirri told the bloodriders. “The Great Rider is too strong for me. Hold him still while I draw the arrow from his flesh.” She let the rags of her gown fall to her waist as she opened a carved chest, and busied herself with bottles and boxes, knives and needles. When she was ready, she broke off the barbed arrowhead and pulled out the shaft, chanting in the singsong tongue of the Lhazareen. She heated a flagon of wine to boiling on the brazier, and poured it over his wounds. Khal Drogo cursed her, but he did not move. She bound the arrow wound with a plaster of wet leaves and turned to the gash on his breast, smearing it with a pale green paste before she pulled the flap of skin back in place. The khal ground his teeth together and swallowed a scream. The godswife took out a silver needle and a bobbin of silk thread and began to close the flesh. When she was done she painted the skin with red ointment, covered it with more leaves, and bound the breast in a ragged piece of lambskin. “You must say the prayers I give you and keep the lambskin in place for ten days and ten nights,” she said. “There will be fever, and itching, and a great scar when the healing is done.”
“她不会伤他的。”丹妮觉得自己可以信任这个丑陋的扁鼻胖妇人，毕竟是她将她从施暴者手中拯救出来的啊。
Khal Drogo sat, bells ringing. “I sing of my scars, sheep woman.” He flexed his arm and scowled.
“如果你们定要留下，就请帮忙吧。”弥丽对血盟卫们说，“伟大的骑马战士太过强壮，请你们按住他，让我把箭拔出来。”她任自己碎裂的长袍落至腰际，前去打开一个雕花箱子，拿出各式瓶罐、小盒、尖刀和针线。一切备妥之后，她先折断箭身，拔出锯齿状的箭头，一边用拉札林人歌唱般的语调吟诵，随后拿起一瓶葡萄酒在火盆上煮沸，浇在伤口上。卓戈卡奥痛得大声骂她，但一动未动。她以湿叶裹住箭伤。然后她把一种淡绿药膏涂在胸部伤口上，再把那层皮拉回原处。卡奥咬紧牙关，忍住尖叫。女祭司取出一根银针和一团丝线，开始缝合伤口。完成之后，她又在伤口抹了一种红色药膏，覆盖更多湿叶，并用一块羊皮裹住胸部。“您必须包着这羊皮，并照我所说的祷词按时祷告，持续十天十夜。”她说，“您会发烧，还会很痒，伤口愈合后也会留下很大的一块疤。”
“Drink neither wine nor the milk of the poppy,” she cautioned him. “Pain you will have, but you must keep your body strong to fight the poison spirits.”
卓戈卡奥坐起来，发际铃铛丁当作响。“羊女，我以我的伤疤为傲。”他动动手臂，痛得皱眉。
“I am khal,” Drogo said. “I spit on pain and drink what I like. Cohollo, bring my vest.” The older man hastened off.
“不能喝酒，也不能喝罂粟花奶，”她警告他，“虽然很痛，但你必须保持身体强壮，才能与毒素的恶灵斗争。”
“Before,” Dany said to the ugly Lhazareen woman, “I heard you speak of birthing songs …”
“我是卡奥，”卓戈说，“我不怕痛，爱喝什么就喝什么。科霍罗，把我的背心拿来。”老科霍罗快步离开。
“I know every secret of the bloody bed, Silver Lady, nor have I ever lost a babe,” Mirri Maz Duur replied.
“刚才，”丹妮对那位丑陋的拉札林女人说。“我听你说起分娩之歌……”
“My time is near,” Dany said. “I would have you attend me when he comes, if you would.”
“银夫人，我懂得染血产床的所有奥秘，从没有接生失败过。”弥丽·马兹·笃尔回答。
Khal Drogo laughed. “Moon of my life, you do not ask a slave, you tell her. She will do as you command.” He jumped down from the altar. “Come, my blood. The stallions call, this place is ashes. It is time to ride.”
“我就快生了，”丹妮说，“如果你愿意，我儿子出生时希望你能帮我接生。”
Haggo followed the khal from the temple, but Qotho lingered long enough to favor Mirri Maz Duur with a stare. “Remember, maegi , as the khal fares, so shall you.”
卓戈卡奥笑道：“我生命中的月亮，跟奴隶说话不是用问的，你只要交代下去，让她照办就成了。”他跳下祭坛。“走吧，吾血之血，马儿在呼唤着我们。此地只剩废墟，动身的时刻到了。”
“As you say, rider,” the woman answered him, gathering up her jars and bottles. “The Great Shepherd guards the flock.”
哈戈随卡奥走出神庙，但柯索留了片刻，瞪着弥丽·马兹·笃尔。“记住，巫魔女，卡奥没事，你才能留下一条命。”
*TYRION
“如您所说，骑马战士。”女人回答他，一边收拾她的瓶瓶罐罐。“愿至高牧神看顾所有羊羔。”
O n a hill overlooking the kingsroad, a long trestle table of rough-hewn pine had been erected beneath an elm tree and covered with a golden cloth. There, beside his pavilion, Lord Tywin took his evening meal with his chief knights and lords bannermen, his great crimson-and-gold standard waving overhead from a lofty pike.
第六十三章 提利昂
Tyrion arrived late, saddlesore, and sour, all too vividly aware of how amusing he must look as he waddled up the slope to his father. The day’s march had been long and tiring. He thought he might get quite drunk tonight. It was twilight, and the air was alive with drifting fireflies.
在一座俯瞰国王大道的丘陵上，搭起了一张原松木做成的折叠长桌，其上铺好了金黄桌布。泰温公爵的大帐就在桌旁，红金相间的大旗飘扬于长竿之上，而他本人便是在此与手下重要骑士和诸侯共进晚餐。
The cooks were serving the meat course: five suckling pigs, skin seared and crackling, a different fruit in every mouth. The smell made his mouth water. “My pardons,” he began, taking his place on the bench beside his uncle.
提利昂到得有些迟，他骑了一整天马，此刻浑身酸痛，摇摇摆摆地爬上缓坡，朝父亲走去，心里十分清楚自己是何等滑稽模样。这天的行军路途漫长，令人筋疲力竭。今晚他打算喝个酩酊大醉。时间已是黄昏，空中满是流萤，仿佛有了生命。
“Perhaps I’d best charge you with burying our dead, Tyrion,” Lord Tywin said. “If you are as late to battle as you are to table, the fighting will all be done by the time you arrive.”
厨子正端上当晚的主菜：五只烤得金黄酥脆，嘴里含着不同水果的乳猪。闻到香味，他口水都流了出来。“不好意思，我迟到了。”他一边说，一边在叔叔身边的板凳上坐下。
“Oh, surely you can save me a peasant or two, Father,” Tyrion replied. “Not too many, I wouldn’t want to be greedy.” He filled his wine cup and watched a serving man carve into the pig. The crisp skin crackled under his knife, and hot juice ran from the meat. It was the loveliest sight Tyrion had seen in ages.
“提利昂，我看还是让你去埋葬死者好了。”泰温公爵说，“要是你上战场也跟上餐桌一般慢，等你光临，仗都已经打完了。”
“Ser Addam’s outriders say the Stark host has moved south from the Twins,” his father reported as his trencher was filled with slices of pork. “Lord Frey’s levies have joined them. They are likely no more than a day’s march north of us.”
“哎，父亲，留一两个农民给我对付总行吧？”提利昂回答，“不用太多，我这个人向来不贪心。”他自顾自地斟满酒，一边看着仆人切猪肉，松脆的皮在刀子下哔啪作响，滚烫的油汁流下来。提利昂已经很久没见过如此美丽的景象了。
“Please, Father,” Tyrion said. “I’m about to eat.”
“据亚当爵士的斥候报告，史塔克军已从孪河城南下，”父亲一边看着仆人把肉片放进他的木盘，一边说，“佛雷大人的部队加入了他们。此刻敌军就在北边，离我们大概一日行程。”
“Does the thought of facing the Stark boy unman you, Tyrion? Your brother Jaime would be eager to come to grips with him.”
“父亲，您行行好，”提利昂说，“我正要开始吃呢。”
“I’d sooner come to grips with that pig. Robb Stark is not half so tender, and he never smelled as good.”
“提利昂，一想到面对史塔克家那小鬼，你就吓成这样？换成你哥哥詹姆，他只怕会迫不及待想大显身手。”
Lord Lefford, the sour bird who had charge of their stores and supplies, leaned forward. “I hope your savages do not share your reluctance, else we’ve wasted our good steel on them.”
“我宁可对这头猪大显身手，罗柏·史塔克既没这么嫩，更没这么香。”
“My savages will put your steel to excellent use, my lord,” Tyrion replied. When he had told Lefford he needed arms and armor to equip the three hundred men Ulf had fetched down out of the foothills, you would have thought he’d asked the man to turn his virgin daughters over to their pleasure.
负责辎重补给的莱佛德伯爵——一个无趣的家伙——向前一靠：“希望你那群野蛮人不像你一样没用，否则我们精良的装备就白白浪费了。”
Lord Lefford frowned. “I saw that great hairy one today, the one who insisted that he must have two battle-axes, the heavy black steel ones with twin crescent blades.”
“大人，我保证我那群野蛮人会让你的装备物尽其用。”提利昂回答。之前，当他告诉莱佛德需要武器和护甲，用来装备乌尔夫从山上找来那三百人时，莱佛德的表情活像是别人要他交出自己的闺女。
“Shagga likes to kill with either hand,” Tyrion said as a trencher of steaming pork was laid in front of him.
莱佛德伯爵皱起眉头。“我今天碰见了那个浑身是毛的高个子，那家伙坚持要拿两把战斧。他挑的可都是黑色重钢打造，两面月刃的上等货色。”
“He still had that wood-axe of his strapped to his back.”
“夏嘎喜欢双手操家伙。”提利昂看着侍者把一盘冒烟的烤猪肉放在面前，一边说。
“Shagga is of the opinion that three axes are even better than two.” Tyrion reached a thumb and forefinger into the salt dish, and sprinkled a healthy pinch over his meat.
“他自己那柄木斧还挂在背后。”
Ser Kevan leaned forward. “We had a thought to put you and your wildlings in the vanguard when we come to battle.”
“我想夏嘎的意思是，三把斧头肯定比两把好。”提利昂伸出拇指和食指探进盐碟，在肉上洒了一大把。
Ser Kevan seldom “had a thought” that Lord Tywin had not had first. Tyrion had skewered a chunk of meat on the point of his dagger and brought it to his mouth. Now he lowered it. “The vanguard?” he repeated dubiously. Either his lord father had a new respect for Tyrion’s abilities, or he’d decided to rid himself of his embarrassing get for good. Tyrion had the gloomy feeling he knew which.
这时凯冯爵士倾身向前：“我们有个想法，开战的时候，打算把你和你那群野人放在前锋。”
“They seem ferocious enough,” Ser Kevan said.
凯冯爵士的“想法”通常都是泰温公爵的主意。提利昂原本已拿匕首刺好一块肉，正往嘴边送，一听此言连忙放下。“前锋？”他有些怀疑地重复。若不是父亲大人对他的能力突然产生了敬意，就是打算彻底除掉这个老让他出丑的儿子。至于是前者，还是后者，提利昂有种不祥的预感。
“Ferocious?” Tyrion realized he was echoing his uncle like a trained bird. His father watched, judging him, weighing every word. “Let me tell you how ferocious they are. Last night, a Moon Brother stabbed a Stone Crow over a sausage. So today as we made camp three Stone Crows seized the man and opened his throat for him. Perhaps they were hoping to get the sausage back, I couldn’t say. Bronn managed to keep Shagga from chopping off the dead man’s cock, which was fortunate, but even so Ulf is demanding blood money, which Conn and Shagga refuse to pay.”
“他们看起来很威猛。”凯冯爵士道。
“When soldiers lack discipline, the fault lies with their lord commander,” his father said.
“威猛？”提利昂突然惊觉自己像只训练有素的鸟儿一样不断重复叔叔的话。父亲则在旁观看，严加审度，仔细衡量他所说的每一个字。“让我告诉你他们有多威猛。昨天晚上，有个月人部的家伙为了一根香肠，捅死了一个石鸦部的人。所以呢，今天我们扎营时，三个石鸦部的人抓住凶手，割开他的喉咙为同伴报仇。或许他们想拿回香肠，我不确定。波隆好不容易才阻止夏嘎剁掉那死人的老二，算是不幸中的大幸。即便如此，乌尔夫还坚决要求对方为这个血债付出赔偿金，可康恩和夏嘎不肯。”
His brother Jaime had always been able to make men follow him eagerly, and die for him if need be. Tyrion lacked that gift. He bought loyalty with gold, and compelled obedience with his name. “A bigger man would be able to put the fear in them, is that what you’re saying, my lord?”
“士兵缺乏纪律，表示指挥官领导无方。”父亲说。
Lord Tywin Lannister turned to his brother. “If my son’s men will not obey his commands, perhaps the vanguard is not the place for him. No doubt he would be more comfortable in the rear, guarding our baggage train.”
哥哥詹姆总有办法使人忠心追随，甚至赔上性命都在所不惜，提利昂可没这本领。他拿黄金换取忠诚，用姓氏使人服从。“您的意思是，换成个子高点的人，可以多些威严，吓他们不敢乱来，对吧，大人？”
“Do me no kindnesses, Father,” he said angrily. “If you have no other command to offer me, I’ll lead your van.”
泰温·兰尼斯特公爵转向弟弟。“若我儿子的手下不愿服从他的命令，那么前锋显然不适合他。毫无疑问，应该让他殿后，负责保护辎重货车。”
Lord Tywin studied his dwarf son. “I said nothing about command. You will serve under Ser Gregor.”
“父亲，不需要这么替我着想。”他怒道，“如果您没别的地方给我指挥，就让我来率领前锋。”
Tyrion took one bite of pork, chewed a moment, and spit it out angrily. “I find I am not hungry after all,” he said, climbing awkwardly off the bench. “Pray excuse me, my lords.”
泰温公爵打量着他的侏儒儿子。“我可没说让你指挥，你是格雷果爵士的部属。”
Lord Tywin inclined his head, dismissing him. Tyrion turned and walked away. He was conscious of their eyes on his back as he waddled down the hill. A great gust of laughter went up from behind him, but he did not look back. He hoped they all choked on their suckling pigs.
提利昂咬了口猪肉，嚼了两下，然后愤怒地吐出来。“我发现自己一点也不饿。”说着他别扭地爬下长凳。“诸位大人，我先告退了。”
Dusk had settled, turning all the banners black. The Lannister camp sprawled for miles between the river and the kingsroad. In amongst the men and the horses and the trees, it was easy to get lost, and Tyrion did. He passed a dozen great pavilions and a hundred cookfires. Fireflies drifted amongst the tents like wandering stars. He caught the scent of garlic sausage, spiced and savory, so tempting it made his empty stomach growl. Away in the distance, he heard voices raised in some bawdy song. A giggling woman raced past him, naked beneath a dark cloak, her drunken pursuer stumbling over tree roots. Farther on, two spearmen faced each other across a little trickle of a stream, practicing their thrust-and-parry in the fading light, their chests bare and slick with sweat.
泰温公爵点头同意。提利昂转身一跛一跛地走下山丘，心里很清楚身后众人的目光。一阵哄笑传来，但他没有回头，只暗自希望他们最好都被乳猪噎死。
No one looked at him. No one spoke to him. No one paid him any mind. He was surrounded by men sworn to House Lannister, a vast host twenty thousand strong, and yet he was alone.
夜幕已然低垂，将所有旗帜染成黑色。兰尼斯特军的营地位于河流和国王大道之间，绵延数里。在众多人马和树林之中，非常容易迷路。果不其然，提利昂茫然地走过十几个大帐篷和百余座营火，忽然迷失了方向。萤火虫在营帐间窜动，有如游荡的星星。他闻到蒜肠的香味，辛辣又可口，令他空空的肚腹饥肠辘辘。他听见远处有人唱起情色小曲，一个女人咯咯笑着从身边跑过，身上只盖了件深色斗篷，一个醉酒的人追在她后面，没两步就被树根绊倒。更远的地方，两名长矛兵隔着小溪，就着渐渐黯淡的天光，练习格挡和突刺的技巧，赤裸的胸膛上大汗淋漓。
When he heard the deep rumble of Shagga’s laughter booming through the dark, he followed it to the Stone Crows in their small corner of the night. Conn son of Coratt waved a tankard of ale. “Tyrion Half man! Come, sit by our fire, share meat with the Stone Crows. We have an ox.”
无人看他一眼，无人与他交谈，无人注意到他。在他周围，全是宣誓效忠兰尼斯特家族的部属，一共多达两万人的庞大军团。然而他，却孤独无依。
“I can see that, Conn son of Coratt.” The huge red carcass was suspended over a roaring fire, skewered on a spit the size of a small tree. No doubt it was a small tree. Blood and grease dripped down into the flames as two Stone Crows turned the meat. “I thank you. Send for me when the ox is cooked.” From the look of it, that might even be before the battle. He walked on.
后来，他总算听到夏嘎低沉浑厚的笑声透过夜色轰隆传来，便循着笑声，找到石鸦部过夜的小角落。科拉特之子康恩朝他挥挥一大杯麦酒。“半人提利昂！过来，来我们火边坐坐，跟石鸦部一起吃肉，我们弄到一头牛。”
Each clan had its own cookfire; Black Ears did not eat with Stone Crows, Stone Crows did not eat with Moon Brothers, and no one ate with Burned Men. The modest tent he had coaxed out of Lord Lefford’s stores had been erected in the center of the four fires. Tyrion found Bronn sharing a skin of wine with the new servants. Lord Tywin had sent him a groom and a body servant to see to his needs, and even insisted he take a squire. They were seated around the embers of a small cookfire. A girl was with them; slim, dark-haired, no more than eighteen by the look of her. Tyrion studied her face for a moment, before he spied fishbones in the ashes. “What did you eat?”
“我看到了，科拉特之子康恩。”巨大的血红牛尸被架在熊熊营火之上，用一根粗如小树的烤肉叉串起——恐怕那根叉子原本就是一棵小树罢。鲜血和油汁滴落火焰中，两个石鸦部的人合力转着牛。“谢谢你，等牛烤好后叫我一声。”依目前的情形看来，或许能赶在开战前吃到。他继续往前走。
“Trout, m’lord,” said his groom. “Bronn caught them.”
每个部落都生了自己的营火；黑耳部不和石鸦部共食，石鸦部不和月人部共食，而任何部落都不和灼人部共食。他好不容易才从莱佛德伯爵那儿弄来的帐篷，就位于四部营火中间。来到帐前，提利昂发现波隆正和他新来的仆人们喝酒。泰温公爵派来一个马夫和一个贴身仆人照料他起居，甚至还坚持他应该带个侍从。他们围坐在小营火的灰烬旁，在场的还有个女孩；纤细、黑发，看来不超过十八岁。提利昂打量了她一会儿，这才瞥见火烬里的鱼骨头。“你们吃了什么？”
Trout , he thought. Suckling pig. Damn my father . He stared mournfully at the bones, his belly rumbling.
“大人，是鳟鱼。”他的马夫说，“波隆抓的。”
His squire, a boy with the unfortunate name of Podrick Payne, swallowed whatever he had been about to say. The lad was a distant cousin to Ser Ilyn Payne, the king’s headsman … and almost as quiet, although not for want of a tongue. Tyrion had made him stick it out once, just to be certain. “Definitely a tongue,” he had said. “Someday you must learn to use it.”
鳟鱼，他心想，烤乳猪。父亲真该死。他有些哀怨地望着鱼骨，肚子咕噜叫。
At the moment, he did not have the patience to try and coax a thought out of the lad, whom he suspected had been inflicted on him as a cruel jape. Tyrion turned his attention back to the girl. “Is this her?” he asked Bronn.
他的侍从把原本要说的话吞了下去，这孩子很不幸地姓了派恩，波德瑞克·派恩，是御前执法官伊林·派恩爵士的远亲……几乎和他一样沉默寡言，虽然并非没有舌头。某一天，提利昂叫他把舌头吐出来，确定一下。“的确是舌头，”他评说，“哪天你总得学着用。”
She rose gracefully and looked down at him from the lofty height of five feet or more. “It is, m’lord, and she can speak for herself, if it please you.”
今天这种时候，他可没耐性去套那孩子的话。他更怀疑父亲派这小鬼来当侍从，根本是个恶意的玩笑。于是提利昂把注意力转移到女孩身上。“就是她？”他问波隆。
He cocked his head to one side. “I am Tyrion, of House Lannister. Men call me the Imp.”
她优雅地起身，从五尺多的高度俯瞰他。“是的，大人，而且她自己会说话，如果您高兴的话。”
“My mother named me Shae. Men call me … often.”
他歪歪头。“我是兰尼斯特家族的提利昂，别人叫我小恶魔。”
Bronn laughed, and Tyrion had to smile. “Into the tent, Shae, if you would be so kind.” He lifted the flap and held it for her. Inside, he knelt to light a candle.
“我母亲为我取名雪伊，别人也常这样叫……我。”
The life of a soldier was not without certain compensations. Wherever you have a camp, you are certain to have camp followers. At the end of the day’s march, Tyrion had sent Bronn back to find him a likely whore. “I would prefer one who is reasonably young, with as pretty a face as you can find,” he had said. “If she has washed sometime this year, I shall be glad. If she hasn’t, wash her. Be certain that you tell her who I am, and warn her of what I am.” Jyck had not always troubled to do that. There was a look the girls got in their eyes sometimes when they first beheld the lordling they’d been hired to pleasure … a look that Tyrion Lannister did not ever care to see again.
波隆哈哈大笑，提利昂也不禁扬起嘴角。“那么，就请进帐罢，雪伊。”他为她掀起帷幕，进去之后，燃起一支蜡烛。
He lifted the candle and looked her over. Bronn had done well enough; she was doe-eyed and slim, with small firm breasts and a smile that was by turns shy, insolent, and wicked. He liked that. “Shall I take my gown off, m’lord?” she asked.
军旅生活多少有些补偿，无论在何处扎营，必定有人循踪而至。今天行军结束时，提利昂叫波隆去给他找个像样的营妓。“最好年轻一点的，当然，越漂亮越好。”他说，“如果她今年洗过澡，那最好，如果没有，把她先洗干净。务必告诉她我的身份，以及我是什么德行。”杰克以前通常懒得说明，于是许多女孩初次见到这位她们受雇服侍的贵族少爷时，眼底的神情便油然而生……那是一种提利昂·兰尼斯特这辈子难以忍受的神情。
“In good time. Are you a maiden, Shae?”
他拿起蜡烛，把她仔细打量一番。波隆眼光不错：她生得一双雌鹿般的眸子，身形纤细，乳房小而结实，脸上的笑容时而羞怯、时而傲慢、时而邪恶。他挺满意。“大人，要我脱衣服吗？”她问。
“If it please you, m’lord,” she said demurely.
“稍等，雪伊，你是处女吗？”
“What would please me would be the truth of you, girl.”
“大人，您高兴的话，就这样想吧。”她故作庄重地说。
“Aye, but that will cost you double.”
“小妹妹，知道真相我才会高兴。”
Tyrion decided they would get along splendidly. “I am a Lannister. Gold I have in plenty, and you’ll find me generous … but I’ll want more from you than what you’ve got between your legs, though I’ll want that too. You’ll share my tent, pour my wine, laugh at my jests, rub the ache from my legs after each day’s ride … and whether I keep you a day or a year, for so long as we are together you will take no other men into your bed.”
“是吗？那您得付双倍的钱。”
“Fair enough.” She reached down to the hem of her thin roughspun gown and pulled it up over her head in one smooth motion, tossing it aside. There was nothing underneath but Shae. “If he don’t put down that candle, m’lord will burn his fingers.”
提利昂认为他们简直是绝配。“我是兰尼斯特家的人，有的是黄金，你会发现我是个很慷慨的人……但我要的不只是你两腿间的东西——当然那个我肯定要。我要你和我一起住，为我倒酒，陪我说笑，每天在我奔波之后替我按摩双脚……而且，不管我留你一天还是一年，只要我们在一起，你就不许跟其他男人上床。”
Tyrion put down the candle, took her hand in his, and pulled her gently to him. She bent to kiss him. Her mouth tasted of honey and cloves, and her fingers were deft and practiced as they found the fastenings of his clothes.
“很公道。”她伸手向下，抓住自己粗布薄衫的裙摆，流畅地上拉过头，丢到一边。底下除了裸体，空无一物。“大人不把蜡烛放下来，可是会烧到手的。”
When he entered her, she welcomed him with whispered endearments and small, shuddering gasps of pleasure. Tyrion suspected her delight was feigned, but she did it so well that it did not matter. That much truth he did not crave.
提利昂放下蜡烛，牵起她的手，轻轻拉拢。她俯身亲吻他，嘴里有蜂蜜和苜蓿的味道，她的手指灵活熟练地找到他衣服的绳结。
He had needed her, Tyrion realized afterward, as she lay quietly in his arms. Her or someone like her. It had been nigh on a year since he’d lain with a woman, since before he had set out for Winterfell in company with his brother and King Robert. He could well die on the morrow or the day after, and if he did, he would sooner go to his grave thinking of Shae than of his lord father, Lysa Arryn, or the Lady Catelyn Stark.
当他进入她体内的时候，她用低回的亲密话语和颤抖的喜乐喘息来迎接他。提利昂怀疑她的愉悦是装出来的，但由于她装得非常逼真，他也就不以为意，毕竟这背后的真相他可不想知道。
He could feel the softness of her breasts pressed against his arm as she lay beside him. That was a good feeling. A song filled his head. Softly, quietly, he began to whistle.
完事后，当她静静地躺在他的怀里，提利昂才明白自己真的很需要她，或者像她这样的人。自他随哥哥及劳勃国王一行前往临冬城至今，已经快一年没和女人睡过了。而明天，或者后天，他就可能战死，果真如此，他死的时候宁可想着雪伊，也不要想着父亲大人、莱莎·艾林或凯特琳·史塔克夫人。
“What’s that, m’lord?” Shae murmured against him.
他感觉到她柔软的胸部靠上自己臂膀，那是一种无比美妙的感觉，在他脑海里突然浮现出那首歌。静静地，轻轻地，他哼唱起来。
“Nothing,” he told her. “A song I learned as a boy, that’s all. Go to sleep, sweetling.”
“大人，唱什么哪？”雪伊靠着他呢喃道。
When her eyes were closed and her breathing deep and steady, Tyrion slid out from beneath her, gently, so as not to disturb her sleep. Naked, he crawled outside, stepped over his squire, and walked around behind his tent to make water.
“没什么，”他告诉她，“只是我小时候学的一首曲儿罢了。快睡罢，小宝贝。”
Bronn was seated cross-legged under a chestnut tree, near where they’d tied the horses. He was honing the edge of his sword, wide awake; the sellsword did not seem to sleep like other men. “Where did you find her?” Tyrion asked him as he pissed.
待她闭上双眼，呼吸变得深沉而规律，提利昂轻轻地从她体下抽身离去，惟恐打扰她好梦。他浑身赤裸地下床，跨过他的侍从，走到帐篷后去撒尿。
“I took her from a knight. The man was loath to give her up, but your name changed his thinking somewhat … that, and my dirk at his throat.”
波隆盘腿坐在一棵栗子树下，靠近拴马的地方，睡意全无地磨着利剑；这佣兵似乎不像别人那般需要睡眠。“你在哪儿找到她的？”提利昂一边尿，一边问他。
“Splendid,” Tyrion said dryly, shaking off the last drops. “I seem to recall saying find me a whore , not make me an enemy.”
“从一个骑士手上抢的，那家伙根本不愿放弃她，是你的名字让他改变了主意……当然，还有我架在他脖子上的匕首。”
“The pretty ones were all claimed,” Bronn said. “I’ll be pleased to take her back if you’d prefer a toothless drab.”
“好极了，”提利昂苦涩地说，一边甩干最后几滴尿液。“我记得我说的是‘帮我找个妓女’，不是‘帮我造个敌人’。”
Tyrion limped closer to where he sat. “My lord father would call that insolence, and send you to the mines for impertinence.”
“漂亮的早抢光了，”波隆道，“你要想换个没牙的丑婆娘，我很乐意帮你把她送回去。”
“Good for me you’re not your father,” Bronn replied. “I saw one with boils all over her nose. Would you like her?”
提利昂跛着脚走到他身边坐下。“你这话要给我老爸听到，必定被加上无礼放肆的罪名，发配去挖矿。”
“What, and break your heart?” Tyrion shot back. “I shall keep Shae. Did you perchance note the name of this knight you took her from? I’d rather not have him beside me in the battle.”
“好在你不是你老爸，”波隆回答，“还有一个鼻子长满疱子的，你要么？”
Bronn rose, cat-quick and cat-graceful, turning his sword in his hand. “You’ll have me beside you in the battle, dwarf.”
“那岂不伤了你的心？”提利昂回敬，“我就留着雪伊。你不会刚巧注意到那骑士叫什么名字吧？打仗的时候，我可不想让他在我身边。”
Tyrion nodded. The night air was warm on his bare skin. “See that I survive this battle, and you can name your reward.”
波隆霍地起身，动作如灵猫一般迅捷优雅，手心转着剑。“侏儒，打仗时我会在你身边。”
Bronn tossed the longsword from his right hand to his left, and tried a cut. “Who’d want to kill the likes of you?”
提利昂点点头，他的皮肤裸露在外，觉得夜晚的空气十分温暖。“保我这场仗活下来，要什么奖赏随你挑。”
“My lord father, for one. He’s put me in the van.”
波隆将长剑从右手抛到左手，然后试着挥了一下。“谁想杀你这种人？”
“I’d do the same. A small man with a big shield. You’ll give the archers fits.”
“我老爸就是一个。他派我打前锋。”
“I find you oddly cheering,” Tyrion said. “I must be mad.”
“是我也会这么安排。小矮人举个大盾牌，教他们的箭手头痛死。”
Bronn sheathed his sword. “Beyond a doubt.”
“听你这么一说，我的心情竟大为振奋，”提利昂道，“我一定是疯了。”
When Tyrion returned to his tent, Shae rolled onto her elbow and murmured sleepily, “I woke and m’lord was gone.”
波隆收剑入鞘。“毫无疑问。”
“M’lord is back now.” He slid in beside her.
提利昂回到帐篷，发现雪伊已经翻身用手肘枕着脸，睡意未消地喃喃说：“我一醒来，大人就不见了。”
Her hand went between his stunted legs, and found him hard. “Yes he is,” she whispered, stroking him.
“大人这不就回来了么。”他钻进被窝，在她身边躺下。
He asked her about the man Bronn had taken her from, and she named the minor retainer of an insignificant lordling. “You need not fear his like, m’lord,” the girl said, her fingers busy at his cock. “He is a small man.”
她探手伸到他畸形的双腿之间，发现他硬了起来。“的确是回来了哟。”她悄声说，同时抚弄他。
“And what am I, pray?” Tyrion asked her. “A giant?”
他问她是被波隆从谁手上带来的，她说出一个小贵族的随从的名字。“大人，您用不着担心他。”女孩说，手指忙个不休。“他是个不起眼的小家伙。”
“Oh, yes,” she purred, “my giant of Lannister.” She mounted him then, and for a time, she almost made him believe it. Tyrion went to sleep smiling …
“那你倒是说说看，我又是什么？”提利昂问她，“难不成我是个巨人？”
… and woke in darkness to the blare of trumpets. Shae was shaking him by the shoulder. “M’lord,” she whispered. “Wake up, m’lord. I’m frightened.”
“哎哟，可不是嘛，”她愉悦地说，“我的兰尼斯特巨人。”说完她骑到他身上，一时之间，几乎就让他相信她的话。提利昂微笑着睡去……
Groggy, he sat up and threw back the blanket. The horns called through the night, wild and urgent, a cry that said hurry hurry hurry . He heard shouts, the clatter of spears, the whicker of horses, though nothing yet that spoke to him of fighting. “My lord father’s trumpets,” he said. “Battle assembly. I thought Stark was yet a day’s march away.”
……直到被黑暗中震耳欲聋的喇叭声吵醒，雪伊摇着他的肩膀。“大人，”她悄声道，“大人您醒醒，我好怕。”
Shae shook her head, lost. Her eyes were wide and white.
他有气无力地坐起来，掀开毛毯，号音响彻夜空，狂野而急促，仿佛在喊着：快啊，快啊，快啊。他听见人们的叫喊、枪矛的撞击、马儿的嘶鸣，好在没有打斗。“是我父亲的喇叭，”他说，“这是作战集合令。史塔克军离我们不是还有一天路程么？”
Groaning, Tyrion lurched to his feet and pushed his way outside, shouting for his squire. Wisps of pale fog drifted through the night, long white fingers off the river. Men and horses blundered through the predawn chill; saddles were being cinched, wagons loaded, fires extinguished. The trumpets blew again: hurry hurry hurry . Knights vaulted onto snorting coursers while men-at-arms buckled their sword belts as they ran. When he found Pod, the boy was snoring softly. Tyrion gave him a sharp poke in the ribs with his toe. “My armor,” he said, “and be quick about it.” Bronn came trotting out of the mists, already armored and ahorse, wearing his battered halfhelm. “Do you know what’s happened?” Tyrion asked him.
雪伊摇摇头，眼睛睁得老大，面色苍白。
“The Stark boy stole a march on us,” Bronn said. “He crept down the kingsroad in the night, and now his host is less than a mile north of here, forming up in battle array.”
提利昂呻吟着下床，摸索着走到帐外，一边叫唤他的侍从。苍白的迷雾自夜幕中飘浮过来，宛如河面上悠长的白手指。人和马在黎明前的寒气里跌跌撞撞，他们忙着系紧马鞍，将货物运上马车，并熄灭营火。号角再度吹响：快啊，快啊，快啊。骑士们纷纷跃上不住吐气的战马，步兵则边跑边扣上剑带。当他找到波德①时，那孩子正轻声打着鼾。提利昂扬腿狠狠地踢了他肋骨一脚。“快把我盔甲拿来，”他说，“动作快。”波隆从雾中跑来，已然全副武装，骑在马上，戴着那顶饱经击打的半罩头盔。“发生什么事了？”提利昂问。
Hurry , the trumpets called, hurry hurry hurry .
“史塔克那小鬼抢先一步，”波隆道，“他趁夜色沿国王大道南下，就在我们北方不到一里，全军成战斗阵形。”
“See that the clansmen are ready to ride.” Tyrion ducked back inside his tent. “Where are my clothes?” he barked at Shae. “There. No, the leather, damn it. Yes. Bring me my boots.”
快啊，号角仿佛在喊，快啊，快啊，快啊。
By the time he was dressed, his squire had laid out his armor, such that it was. Tyrion owned a fine suit of heavy plate, expertly crafted to fit his misshapen body. Alas, it was safe at Casterly Rock, and he was not. He had to make do with oddments assembled from Lord Lefford’s wagons: mail hauberk and coif, a dead knight’s gorget, lobstered greaves and gauntlets and pointed steel boots. Some of it was ornate, some plain; not a bit of it matched, or fit as it should. His breastplate was meant for a bigger man; for his oversize head, they found a huge bucket-shaped greathelm topped with a foot-long triangular spike.
“叫原住民准备出动。”提利昂缩回帐篷。“我的衣服上哪儿去了？”他朝雪伊叫道。“就那件，不对，是那件皮衣，该死，对对，把我靴子拿来。”
Shae helped Pod with the buckles and clasps. “If I die, weep for me,” Tyrion told the whore.
等他穿好衣服，侍从已把他的盔甲排好。这身盔甲实在不起眼。提利昂本有一套上好的重铠，特别精心打造，适合他畸形的身体，只可惜而今好端端放在凯岩城，与他相隔千里。他只好将就一下，在莱佛德伯爵的辎重车辆上东拼西凑：锁甲和头套，一名战死骑士的护喉，圆盘护膝，铁手套和尖角钢靴。其中某几件有装饰，有的则样式普通，通通都不成套，颇不合身。他的胸甲原本是要给个子更大的人穿的；为了对付他那颗不合比例的大头，他们找来一个水桶状的大盔，顶端有根一尺长的三角尖刺。
“How will you know? You’ll be dead.”
雪伊协助波德为他扣上扣环和系带。“如果我死了，记得要为我掉眼泪。”提利昂告诉妓女。
“I’ll know.”
“你人都死了，怎么会知道？”
“I believe you would.” Shae lowered the greathelm down over his head, and Pod fastened it to his gorget. Tyrion buckled on his belt, heavy with the weight of shortsword and dirk. By then his groom had brought up his mount, a formidable brown courser armored as heavily as he was. He needed help to mount; he felt as though he weighed a thousand stone. Pod handed him up his shield, a massive slab of heavy ironwood banded with steel. Lastly they gave him his battle-axe. Shae stepped back and looked him over. “M’lord looks fearsome.”
“我就是知道。”
“M’lord looks a dwarf in mismatched armor,” Tyrion answered sourly, “but I thank you for the kindness. Podrick, should the battle go against us, see the lady safely home.” He saluted her with his axe, wheeled his horse about, and trotted off. His stomach was a hard knot, so tight it pained him. Behind, his servants hurriedly began to strike his tent. Pale crimson fingers fanned out to the east as the first rays of the sun broke over the horizon. The western sky was a deep purple, speckled with stars. Tyrion wondered whether this was the last sunrise he would ever see … and whether wondering was a mark of cowardice. Did his brother Jaime ever contemplate death before a battle?
“我相信你会。”雪伊为他戴上巨盔，波德随即将之与护喉相连。提利昂扣上腰带，挂好短剑和匕首，沉甸甸的。这时马夫牵来他的坐骑，那是一头结实的棕色大马，身上的护甲和他一样厚实。他得别人帮忙才上得了马，只觉自己如有千石重。波德递上他的铁木镶钢边大盾，然后是他的战斧。雪伊退开一步，上下打量他一番。“大人您看起来很威武。”
A warhorn sounded in the far distance, a deep mournful note that chilled the soul. The clansmen climbed onto their scrawny mountain horses, shouting curses and rude jokes. Several appeared to be drunk. The rising sun was burning off the drifting tendrils of fog as Tyrion led them off. What grass the horses had left was heavy with dew, as if some passing god had scattered a bag of diamonds over the earth. The mountain men fell in behind him, each clan arrayed behind its own leaders.
“大人我看起来像个穿着滑稽盔甲的侏儒。”提利昂酸酸地说，“不过我谢谢你的好意。波德瑞克，倘若战事对我方不利，请护送这位小姐平安回家。”他举起战斧向她致意，然后调转马头，飞奔而去。他的肚子里好似打了一个结，绞得很紧，痛得厉害。在他身后，他的仆人连忙开始拔营。朝阳自地平线升起，一根根淡红的手指从东方伸出。西边的天空是一片深紫，缀着几颗星星。提利昂不知这是否会是他今生所见最后一次日出……也不知思索这类事情是否就是怯懦的表现。哥哥詹姆在出战前想过死亡么？
In the dawn light, the army of Lord Tywin Lannister unfolded like an iron rose, thorns gleaming.
远处响起军号，低沉哀怨，令人灵魂不寒而栗。原住民纷纷爬上骨瘦如柴的山地坐骑，高声咒骂、彼此嘲弄，其中几个明显是醉了。提利昂领军出发时，空气中游移的雾丝正逐渐被东升旭日所蒸发，马儿吃剩的青草上凝满露水，仿佛有位天神刚巧路过，洒下整袋钻石。高山氏族紧跟在他身后，各个部落的人各自追随自己的领袖。
His uncle would lead the center. Ser Kevan had raised his standards above the kingsroad. Quivers hanging from their belts, the foot archers arrayed themselves into three long lines, to east and west of the road, and stood calmly stringing their bows. Between them, pikemen formed squares; behind were rank on rank of men-at-arms with spear and sword and axe. Three hundred heavy horse surrounded Ser Kevan and the lords bannermen Lefford, Lydden, and Serrett with all their sworn retainers.
黎明的晨光中，泰温·兰尼斯特公爵的军队有如一朵缓缓绽开的钢铁玫瑰，尖刺闪闪发光。
The right wing was all cavalry, some four thousand men, heavy with the weight of their armor. More than three quarters of the knights were there, massed together like a great steel fist. Ser Addam Marbrand had the command. Tyrion saw his banner unfurl as his standard-bearer shook it out; a burning tree, orange and smoke. Behind him flew Ser Flement’s purple unicorn, the brindled boar of Crakehall, the bantam rooster of Swyft, and more.
中军由叔叔指挥，凯冯爵士已在国王大道上竖起旗帜。步弓手排成三列，分立道路东西，冷静地调试弓弦，箭枝在腰间晃动。成方阵队形的长枪兵站在弓箭手中间，后方则是一排接一排手持矛、剑和斧头的步兵。三百名重骑兵围绕着凯冯爵士、莱佛德伯爵、莱顿伯爵和沙略特伯爵等诸侯及其随从。
His lord father took his place on the hill where he had slept. Around him, the reserve assembled; a huge force, half mounted and half foot, five thousand strong. Lord Tywin almost always chose to command the reserve; he would take the high ground and watch the battle unfold below him, committing his forces when and where they were needed most.
右翼全为骑兵，共约四千人，装甲厚重。超过四分之三的骑士齐聚于此，有如一只巨大钢拳。该队由亚当·马尔布兰爵士指挥。提利昂看到他的掌旗官展开旗帜，家徽立即显露：一棵燃烧之树，橙色与烟灰相间。在他身后有佛列蒙爵士的紫色独角兽，克雷赫家族的斑纹野猪，以及史威佛家族的矮脚公鸡等旗号。
Even from afar, his lord father was resplendent. Tywin Lannister’s battle armor put his son Jaime’s gilded suit to shame. His greatcloak was sewn from countless layers of cloth-of-gold, so heavy that it barely stirred even when he charged, so large that its drape covered most of his stallion’s hindquarters when he took the saddle. No ordinary clasp would suffice for such a weight, so the greatcloak was held in place by a matched pair of miniature lionesses crouching on his shoulders, as if poised to spring. Their mate, a male with a magnificent mane, reclined atop Lord Tywin’s greathelm, one paw raking the air as he roared. All three lions were wrought in gold, with ruby eyes. His armor was heavy steel plate, enameled in a dark crimson, greaves and gauntlets inlaid with ornate gold scrollwork. His rondels were golden sunbursts, all his fastenings were gilded, and the red steel was burnished to such a high sheen that it shone like fire in the light of the rising sun.
父亲大人则坐镇大帐所在的丘陵之上，四周是预备队，一半骑兵一半步兵，多达五千人。泰温公爵向来指挥预备队，身处可将战况尽收眼底的高地，视情形将部队投入最需要的地方。
Tyrion could hear the rumble of the foemen’s drums now. He remembered Robb Stark as he had last seen him, in his father’s high seat in the Great Hall of Winterfell, a sword naked and shining in his hands. He remembered how the direwolves had come at him out of the shadows, and suddenly he could see them again, snarling and snapping, teeth bared in his face. Would the boy bring his wolves to war with him? The thought made him uneasy.
即便从远处观之，父亲也依旧辉煌耀眼。泰温·兰尼斯特的战甲，连他儿子詹姆的镀金套装与之相比，都会黯然失色，他的大披风由难以计数的金缕丝线织成，重到连冲锋都鲜少飘起，一旦上马则几乎将坐骑后腿完全遮住。普通的披风钩扣无法承受如此重量，取而代之的是一对趴在肩头，相互对应的小母狮，仿佛随时准备一跃而出。她们的配偶是一只鬃毛壮伟的雄狮，昂首立于泰温公爵的巨盔顶，一爪探空，张口怒吼。三头狮子都是纯金打造，镶了红宝石眼睛。他的盔甲则是厚重的钢板铠，上了暗红色瓷釉，护膝和铁手套均有繁复的黄金涡形装饰。护手圆盘是黄金日芒，每一个钩扣都镀上了金。红钢铠甲经过一再打磨，在旭日光芒中鲜亮如火。
The northerners would be exhausted after their long sleepless march. Tyrion wondered what the boy had been thinking. Did he think to take them unawares while they slept? Small chance of that; whatever else might be said of him, Tywin Lannister was no man’s fool.
这时，提利昂已可听见敌军的隆隆战鼓。他记起上次在临冬城大厅，看见罗柏·史塔克坐在他父亲的高位上，手中未入鞘的长剑闪闪发光。他记得冰原狼自暗处攻来的景象，突然间仿佛又看到它们咆哮着向他扑来，咧嘴露出尖牙利齿。那小鬼会带狼上战场吗？这念头令他大感不安。
The van was massing on the left. He saw the standard first, three black dogs on a yellow field. Ser Gregor sat beneath it, mounted on the biggest horse Tyrion had ever seen. Bronn took one look at him and grinned. “Always follow a big man into battle.”
经过整夜无休的长途行军，北方人此刻一定筋疲力竭。提利昂不明白那小鬼究竟打的是什么主意，难道想趁对方熟睡时攻其不备？这样的机会实在不大，抛开其他方面不谈，泰温·兰尼斯特对战争可是精明之极。
Tyrion threw him a hard look. “And why is that?”
前锋军在左方集结。当先便是黄底的三黑狗旗，格雷果爵士正在旗下，骑着提利昂平生所见最大的马。波隆看了他一眼，嘻嘻笑道：“打仗时，记住跟着大个子。”
“They make such splendid targets. That one, he’ll draw the eyes of every bowman on the field.”
提利昂严厉地看了他一眼。“这是为什么？”
Laughing, Tyrion regarded the Mountain with fresh eyes. “I confess, I had not considered it in that light.”
“他们是最棒的箭靶，瞧那家伙，他会吸引全战场弓箭手的目光。”
Clegane had no splendor about him; his armor was steel plate, dull grey, scarred by hard use and showing neither sigil nor ornament. He was pointing men into position with his blade, a two-handed greatsword that Ser Gregor waved about with one hand as a lesser man might wave a dagger. “Any man runs, I’ll cut him down myself,” he was roaring when he caught sight of Tyrion. “Imp! Take the left. Hold the river. If you can.”
提利昂笑笑，转用全新的观点审视魔山。“我得承认，我还从没这么想过。”
The left of the left. To turn their flank, the Starks would need horses that could run on water. Tyrion led his men toward the riverbank. “Look,” he shouted, pointing with his axe. “The river.” A blanket of pale mist still clung to the surface of the water, the murky green current swirling past underneath. The shallows were muddy and choked with reeds. “That river is ours. Whatever happens, keep close to the water. Never lose sight of it. Let no enemy come between us and our river. If they dirty our waters, hack off their cocks and feed them to the fishes.”
克里冈的装备半点也称不上华丽：盔甲是深灰色的厚重钢板，其上只有长期剧烈使用的痕迹，没有任何纹章或装饰。他的佩剑是一把双手巨剑，然而格雷果爵士单手提起浑如常人拿匕首一般轻松。此刻，他正以剑尖戳指，喝令众人就位。“谁要敢逃跑，我就亲手宰了他！”他咆哮道，转头看到了提利昂。“小恶魔！你守左边，看你有没有能耐守住河流。”
Shagga had an axe in either hand. He smashed them together and made them ring. “Halfman!” he shouted. Other Stone Crows picked up the cry, and the Black Ears and Moon Brothers as well. The Burned Men did not shout, but they rattled their swords and spears. “Halfman! Halfman! Halfman!”
那是左军的最左翼，只要守住这里，史塔克军便无法从侧面包抄——除非他们的马能在水上跑。提利昂领军朝河岸行去。“你们看！”他以斧指河，叫道。“就是这条河。”一层白雾依然如毯子般笼罩水面，暗绿河水奔流其下。浅滩满布泥泞，遍生芦苇。“我们负责防守此地。无论发生什么，保持靠近河流，决不要让它离开视线，决不能让任何敌人进到河流和我们之间。他们要玷污我们的河水，我们就剁掉他们的命根子，丢进河里喂鱼吃。”
Tyrion turned his courser in a circle to look over the field. The ground was rolling and uneven here; soft and muddy near the river, rising in a gentle slope toward the kingsroad, stony and broken beyond it, to the east. A few trees spotted the hillsides, but most of the land had been cleared and planted. His heart pounded in his chest in time to the drums, and under his layers of leather and steel his brow was cold with sweat. He watched Ser Gregor as the Mountain rode up and down the line, shouting and gesticulating. This wing too was all cavalry, but where the right was a mailed fist of knights and heavy lancers, the vanguard was made up of the sweepings of the west: mounted archers in leather jerkins, a swarming mass of undisciplined freeriders and sellswords, fieldhands on plow horses armed with scythes and their fathers’ rusted swords, half-trained boys from the stews of Lannisport … and Tyrion and his mountain clansmen.
夏嘎双手各持一斧，这时他两斧用力一敲，发出巨响。“半人万岁！”他叫道。石鸦部的人立刻跟进，黑耳部和月人部也照样呼喊。灼人部虽然没叫，但他们拿起枪剑互击。“半人万岁！半人万岁！”
“Crow food,” Bronn muttered beside him, giving voice to what Tyrion had left unsaid. He could only nod. Had his lord father taken leave of his senses? No pikes, too few bowmen, a bare handful of knights, the ill-armed and unarmored, commanded by an unthinking brute who led with his rage … how could his father expect this travesty of a battle to hold his left?
提利昂骑马绕圈，检视战场。周围的土地崎岖不平：岸边是滑软泥泞，低缓上坡，升向国王大道，再往东去，则是多石的破碎地形。丘陵有些许林木点缀，不过此间树木多半已被伐尽，辟作农田。他听着战鼓，心脏在胸口随着节奏怦怦跳动，在层层的皮衣钢甲下，他的额际冷汗直流。他看着魔山格雷果爵士策马在战线上来来去去．高声喊话，指手画脚。左军的组成也多是骑兵，然而并不若右翼那样是由骑士和重装枪骑兵组成的钢拳，而是西境的杂牌部队：仅穿皮甲的弓骑兵、大批毫无纪律的自由骑手和流浪武士，骑着犁马、手持镰刀和祖父辈遗留的生锈刀剑的庄稼汉，兰尼斯港小巷中找来、并未完成训练的男孩……以及提利昂和他的高山氏族。
He had no time to think about it. The drums were so near that the beat crept under his skin and set his hands to twitching. Bronn drew his longsword, and suddenly the enemy was there before them, boiling over the tops of the hills, advancing with measured tread behind a wall of shields and pikes.
“等着喂乌鸦吧。”波隆在他身边低声呢喃，说出了提利昂没说的话，他不由得点头同意。父亲大人难道失却了理智？左翼不仅没有矛兵，弓箭手很少，骑士更是稀罕，尽是些装备低劣、未加防护的人，况且还是由一个行事不经大脑、全凭意气用事的残暴粗汉所率领……如此可笑的一支军队，父亲竟期望他们守住左翼？
Gods be damned, look at them all , Tyrion thought, though he knew his father had more men on the field. Their captains led them on armored warhorses, standard-bearers riding alongside with their banners. He glimpsed the bull moose of the Hornwoods, the Karstark sunburst, Lord Cerwyn’s battle-axe, and the mailed fist of the Glovers … and the twin towers of Frey, blue on grey. So much for his father’s certainty that Lord Walder would not bestir himself. The white of House Stark was seen everywhere, the grey direwolves seeming to run and leap as the banners swirled and streamed from the high staffs. Where is the boy? Tyrion wondered.
他没有时间仔细思考，鼓声愈来愈近，咚咚咚咚，潜进他的皮肤之下，令他双手抽搐。波隆拔出长剑，刹那间，敌人已出现在前方，从丘陵顶端漫山遍野地冒出来，他们躲在盾牌和长矛构成的壁垒之后，整齐划一地迈步前进。
A warhorn blew. Haroooooooooooooooooooooooo , it cried, its voice as long and low and chilling as a cold wind from the north. The Lannister trumpets answered, da-DA da-DA da-DAAAAAAAAA , brazen and defiant, yet it seemed to Tyrion that they sounded somehow smaller, more anxious. He could feel a fluttering in his bowels, a queasy liquid feeling; he hoped he was not going to die sick.
诸神该死，瞧瞧他们有多少人，提利昂心想，不过他明白父亲的总兵力比较多。敌军的首领们骑着披甲战马，领导士兵前进，掌旗官举起家族旗帜与之并肩而行。他瞥见霍伍德家族的驼鹿旗帜、卡史塔克家族的日芒旗、赛文伯爵的战斧旗、葛洛佛家族的盔甲铁拳……其间更有佛雷家族的灰底蓝色双塔旗，前几天父亲还信誓旦旦地说瓦德大人不会出兵。史塔克家族的白色旗帜四处可见，旌旗在风中飘荡，翻飞于长竿之上，灰色的冰原狼仿佛也在旗帜上奔跃。那小鬼在哪里？提利昂纳闷。
As the horns died away, a hissing filled the air; a vast flight of arrows arched up from his right, where the archers stood flanking the road. The northerners broke into a run, shouting as they came, but the Lannister arrows fell on them like hail, hundreds of arrows, thousands, and shouts turned to screams as men stumbled and went down. By then a second flight was in the air, and the archers were fitting a third arrow to their bowstrings.
军号响起，呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜，低沉而悠长，有如来自北方的冷风，令人不寒而栗。兰尼斯特的喇叭随即回应，嘟——嘟、嘟——嘟、嘟——嘟嘟嘟嘟嘟嘟嘟嘟嘟嘟，宏亮而不驯，只是提利昂的心中却觉得比较小声，且有些不安。他的五脏六腑一阵翻搅，涌起一股恶心，眩然欲呕；他暗暗希望自己可别因反胃而死。
The trumpets blared again, da-DAAA da-DAAA da-DA da-DA da-DAAAAAAA . Ser Gregor waved his huge sword and bellowed a command, and a thousand other voices screamed back at him. Tyrion put his spurs to his horse and added one more voice to the cacophony, and the van surged forward. “The river!” he shouted at his clansmen as they rode. “Remember, hew to the river.” He was still leading when they broke a canter, until Chella gave a bloodcurdling shriek and galloped past him, and Shagga howled and followed. The clansmen charged after them, leaving Tyrion in their dust.
当号声渐息，嘶嘶声填满了空缺。在他右边，道路两侧的弓箭手洒出一阵箭雨，北方人开步快跑，边跑边吼。兰尼斯特的弓箭如冰雹一般朝他们身上招呼，百枝，千枝，刹那间不可胜数。不少人中箭倒地，呐喊转为哀嚎。这时第二波攻击已从空中落下，弓箭手们纷纷将第三枝箭搭上弓弦。
A crescent of enemy spearmen had formed ahead, a double hedgehog bristling with steel, waiting behind tall oaken shields marked with the sunburst of Karstark. Gregor Clegane was the first to reach them, leading a wedge of armored veterans. Half the horses shied at the last second, breaking their charge before the row of spears. The others died, sharp steel points ripping through their chests. Tyrion saw a dozen men go down. The Mountain’s stallion reared, lashing out with iron-shod hooves as a barbed spearhead raked across his neck. Maddened, the beast lunged into the ranks. Spears thrust at him from every side, but the shield wall broke beneath his weight. The northerners stumbled away from the animal’s death throes. As his horse fell, snorting blood and biting with his last red breath, the Mountain rose untouched, laying about him with his two-handed greatsword.
喇叭再度响起，嘟——嘟、嘟——嘟、嘟——嘟、嘟——嘟嘟嘟嘟嘟嘟嘟嘟。格雷果爵士挥动巨剑，吼出一声命令，几千个人的声音随即回应。提利昂一踢马肚，放声加入这个嘈杂的大合唱，随后前锋军便向前冲去。“河岸！”当他们策马开跑，他对原住民吼道，“记住！守住河岸！”开始冲刺时，他还在前方带头，但齐拉随即发出一声毛骨悚然的凄厉呐喊，从他身边向前窜去，夏嘎狂吼一声，也跟了上去，原住民们纷纷跟进，把提利昂留在他们扬起的烟尘中。
Shagga went bursting through the gap before the shields could close, other Stone Crows hard behind him. Tyrion shouted, “Burned Men! Moon Brothers! After me!” but most of them were ahead of him. He glimpsed Timett son of Timett vault free as his mount died under him in full stride, saw a Moon Brother impaled on a Karstark spear, watched Conn’s horse shatter a man’s ribs with a kick. A flight of arrows descended on them; where they came from he could not say, but they fell on Stark and Lannister alike, rattling off armor or finding flesh. Tyrion lifted his shield and hid beneath it.
正前方，一群敌军枪兵组成半月阵形，有如一只两面生刺的钢剌猬，躲在绘有卡史塔克家族日芒纹章的高大橡木盾后方，严阵以待。格雷果·克里冈率领一队精锐的重装骑兵，成楔形阵势，率先与之接战。面对大排长枪，半数的马在最后一刻停止冲刺，闪避开去。有的则是横冲直撞，枪尖贯胸而出，当场死亡，提利昂看到十来个人因此倒地。魔山的坐骑被一根带刺枪尖刮过脖颈，它人立起来，伸出镶蹄铁的双脚便往外踢。发狂的战马跃入敌阵，长枪自四面八方向它捅来，但盾墙也同时在它的重压之下瓦解，北方人脚步踉跄地闪避这只动物的垂死挣扎。战马轰然倒下，吐血身亡，魔山却毫发无伤地起身，高擎双手巨剑，展开疯狂攻击。
The hedgehog was crumbling, the northerners reeling back under the impact of the mounted assault. Tyrion saw Shagga catch a spearman full in the chest as the fool came on at a run, saw his axe shear through mail and leather and muscle and lungs. The man was dead on his feet, the axehead lodged in his breast, yet Shagga rode on, cleaving a shield in two with his left-hand battle-axe while the corpse was bouncing and stumbling bonelessly along on his right. Finally the dead man slid off. Shagga smashed the two axes together and roared.
夏嘎趁敌方的盾墙上的裂缝还来不及合拢，也冲了进去，石鸦部的人众紧跟在后。提利昂高叫：“灼人部！月人部！跟我来！”不过他们大都已冲到他前面去了。他瞥见提魅之子提魅的坐骑倒地而死，人则跳开脱身；有个月人部民被钉死在卡史塔克家的长矛上；康恩的马则扬腿踢断敌人的肋骨。这时，一阵箭雨洒在他们头上，究竟从何而来，他说不准，总之对史塔克军和兰尼斯特军一视同仁。它们或从盔甲上弹开，或找到暴露的血肉。提利昂举起盾牌，躲在下面。
By then the enemy was on him, and Tyrion’s battle shrunk to the few feet of ground around his horse. A man-at-arms thrust at his chest and his axe lashed out, knocking the spear aside. The man danced back for another try, but Tyrion spurred his horse and rode right over him. Bronn was surrounded by three foes, but he lopped the head off the first spear that came at him, and raked his blade across a second man’s face on his backslash.
在骑兵的冲击下，刺猬逐渐崩解，北方人纷纷后退。提利昂看见有个矛兵愚蠢地朝夏嘎直冲过去，结果被夏嘎战斧一挥正中胸膛，穿透盔甲、皮革、肌肉和肺，顿时毙命。斧刃卡在对手胸膛里，但夏嘎马不停蹄，又用左手的战斧将另一个敌人的盾牌劈成两半，右手的尸体则绵软无力地随马弹跳颠簸。最后，死尸滑落地面，夏嘎高举双斧，交互撞击，发出慑人的呐喊。
A thrown spear came hurtling at Tyrion from the left and lodged in his shield with a woody chunk . He wheeled and raced after the thrower, but the man raised his own shield over his head. Tyrion circled around him, raining axe blows down on the wood. Chips of oak went flying, until the northerner lost his feet and slipped, falling flat on his back with his shield on top of him. He was below the reach of Tyrion’s axe and it was too much bother to dismount, so he left him there and rode after another man, taking him from behind with a sweeping downcut that sent a jolt of impact up his arm. That won him a moment’s respite. Reining up, he looked for the river. There it was, off to the right. Somehow he had gotten turned around.
这时他自己也冲入了敌阵，战场瞬间缩小到坐骑周围几尺。一个步兵手持长矛朝他胸膛戳来，他战斧一挥，将矛格开，那人向后跳去，打算再试一次，但提利昂调转马头，把他踩在马下。波隆被三个敌兵团团围住，但他砍断第一支向他刺去的矛头，反手一剑又正中另一个人面门。
A Burned Man rode past, slumped against his horse. A spear had entered his belly and come out through his back. He was past any help, but when Tyrion saw one of the northerners run up and make a grab for his reins, he charged.
一枝飞矛从左方朝提利昂射来，“咚”地一声插在木盾上。他转身追击掷矛者，但对方举盾过头，于是提利昂策马绕着他转，战斧如雨般落在盾上。橡木碎屑四溅，最后北方人终于脚底一滑，仰面摔倒在地，盾牌却刚好挡在身体上。提利昂的战斧够不到他，下马又太麻烦，所以他抛下此人，策马攻击另一目标。这次他从对方后背偷袭成功，战斧向下一劈，正中敌人，却也震得自己手臂酸麻。这时，他获得了短暂的喘息机会，便勒住缰绳，寻找河岸，猛然发现河流竟在右手，看来乱军中他不知不觉调转了方向。
His quarry met him sword in hand. He was tall and spare, wearing a long chainmail hauberk and gauntlets of lobstered steel, but he’d lost his helm and blood ran down into his eyes from a gash across his forehead. Tyrion aimed a swipe at his face, but the tall man slammed it aside. “Dwarf,” he screamed. “Die.” He turned in a circle as Tyrion rode around him, hacking at his head and shoulders. Steel rang on steel, and Tyrion soon realized that the tall man was quicker and stronger than he was. Where in the seven hells was Bronn? “Die,” the man grunted, chopping at him savagely. Tyrion barely got his shield up in time, and the wood seemed to explode inward under the force of the blow. The shattered pieces fell away from his arm. “Die!” the swordsman bellowed, shoving in close and whanging Tyrion across the temple so hard his head rang. The blade made a hideous scraping sound as he drew it back over the steel. The tall man grinned … until Tyrion’s destrier bit, quick as a snake, laying his cheek bare to the bone. Then he screamed. Tyrion buried his axe in his head. “You die,” he told him, and he did.
一位灼人部民骑马从他身边跑过，软绵绵地趴在马脖子上，一枝长矛插进肚腹，从背后穿出。虽然人是没救了，但当提利昂看见一名北方士兵跑过去要拉住那匹马的缰绳时，他也冲锋过去。
As he wrenched the blade free, he heard a shout. “Eddard!” a voice rang out. “For Eddard and Winterfell!” The knight came thundering down on him, swinging the spiked ball of a morningstar around his head. Their warhorses slammed together before Tyrion could so much as open his mouth to shout for Bronn. His right elbow exploded with pain as the spikes punched through the thin metal around the joint. His axe was gone, as fast as that. He clawed for his sword, but the morningstar was circling again, coming at his face. A sickening crunch , and he was falling. He did not recall hitting the ground, but when he looked up there was only sky above him. He rolled onto his side and tried to find his feet, but pain shuddered through him and the world throbbed. The knight who had felled him drew up above him. “Tyrion the Imp,” he boomed down. “You are mine. Do you yield, Lannister?”
对方持剑迎战，他生得高大精瘦，穿着一件长衫锁子甲以及龙虾铁手套，不过掉了头盔，鲜血从额头的伤口直流进眼里。提利昂瞄准他的脸，奋力砍去，却被那高个子挥剑格开。“侏儒！”他尖叫，“去死！”提利昂骑马绕着他转，他也跟着旋身，不断挥剑朝他的头颅和肩膀砍劈。刀斧相交，提利昂立时明白高个子不仅动作比他快，力气也比他大上许多。天杀的七层地狱，波隆跑哪儿去了？“去死！”那人咕哝着发动猛烈攻击。提利昂勉强及时举盾，挨下这一记猛击，盾牌仿佛要向内爆开，碎裂的木片从手边落下。“去死！”剑士咆哮着再度进逼，一剑当头劈下，打得提利昂头昏眼花。那人抽回长剑，在他头盔上拉出可怕的金属摩擦，高个子不由得嘿嘿一笑……谁料提利昂的战马突然张口，如蛇一般迅捷地咬掉他一边脸颊，伤口深可见骨。那人厉声尖叫，提利昂一斧劈进他的脑袋。“去死的是你！”他告诉他，对方果然死了。
Yes , Tyrion thought, but the word caught in his throat. He made a croaking sound and fought his way to his knees, fumbling for a weapon. His sword, his dirk, anything …
他正要抽回战斧，却听有人大喊。“为艾德大人而战！”对方声音宏亮，“为临冬城的艾德大人而战！”这名骑士马蹄奔腾，朝他冲来，带刺的流星锤在他头顶挥舞。提利昂还来不及叫唤波隆，两匹战马便轰地撞在一起，流星锤的尖刺穿透右手肘关节处薄弱的金属防护，一阵剧痛顿时炸裂开来，斧头也立刻脱手。他伸手想拔剑，但流星锤呼啦啦转了个圈，又朝他迎面扑来。一声令人作呕的碰撞，他从马上摔了下去。他不记得自己撞到地面，然而待他抬头，上方只有天空。他连忙翻身，想要站起，却痛得浑身发抖，仿佛整个世界都在颤动。将他击落的骑士靠过来，高高在上。“小恶魔提利昂，”他声如洪钟地向下喊，“你是我的俘虏了。投不投降，兰尼斯特？”
“Do you yield?” The knight loomed overhead on his armored warhorse. Man and horse both seemed immense. The spiked ball swung in a lazy circle. Tyrion’s hands were numb, his vision blurred, his scabbard empty. “Yield or die,” the knight declared, his flail whirling faster and faster.
我投降，提利昂心想，但话却卡在喉咙里。他发出沙哑的声音，挣扎着跪起来，胡乱地摸索武器：剑、匕首、什么都好……
Tyrion lurched to his feet, driving his head into the horse’s belly. The animal gave a hideous scream and reared. It tried to twist away from the agony, a shower of blood and viscera poured down over Tyrion’s face, and the horse fell like an avalanche. The next he knew, his visor was packed with mud and something was crushing his foot. He wriggled free, his throat so tight he could scarce talk. “… yield …” he managed to croak faintly.
“投不投降？”骑士高高地坐在披甲的战马上，人和马都活像庞然大物。带刺流星锤慵懒地转着圈。提利昂双手麻木，视觉模糊，剑鞘竟是空的。“不投降就得死。”骑士高声宣布，链锤越转越快。
“Yes,” a voice moaned, thick with pain.
提利昂踉跄着起身，不觉一头撞上马肚子。马儿发出凄厉的嘶喊，前脚跃起，想要挣开剧痛。鲜血和肉块如雨般喷洒在提利昂脸上，接着，马儿以山崩之势轰然倒地。等他回过神来，面罩里已塞满了泥巴，有东西正在撞击他的脚。他挣脱开来，喉咙紧绷得几乎无法言语。“……投降……”他好不容易挤出声来。
Tyrion scraped the mud off his helm so he could see again. The horse had fallen away from him, onto its rider. The knight’s leg was trapped, the arm he’d used to break his fall twisted at a grotesque angle. “Yield,” he repeated. Fumbling at his belt with his good hand, he drew a sword and flung it at Tyrion’s feet. “I yield, my lord.”
“是，我投降。”一个人呻吟道，声音充满痛苦。
Dazed, the dwarf knelt and lifted the blade. Pain hammered through his elbow when he moved his arm. The battle seemed to have moved beyond him. No one remained on his part of the field save a large number of corpses. Ravens were already circling and landing to feed. He saw that Ser Kevan had brought up his center in support of the van; his huge mass of pikemen had pushed the northerners back against the hills. They were struggling on the slopes, pikes thrusting against another wall of shields, these oval and reinforced with iron studs. As he watched, the air filled with arrows again, and the men behind the oak wall crumbled beneath the murderous fire. “I believe you are losing, ser,” he told the knight under the horse. The man made no reply.
提利昂拨开头盔的泥土，发现那匹马朝另一方向倒下，正好压在骑士身上。骑士的一只脚被马困住，用来缓冲撞击的手则扭曲成怪异的角度。“我投降。”他继续说，同时用另一只没被折断的手在腰际摸索，抽出佩剑丢在提利昂脚下。“大人，我投降。”
The sound of hooves coming up behind him made him whirl, though he could scarcely lift the sword he held for the agony in his elbow. Bronn reined up and looked down on him.
侏儒头晕目眩地弯身拾起那把剑，手稍微一动，阵阵剧痛便自肘部直冲脑际。战事似乎已经转移到别的地方，他所在的位置除了大批尸体，没有活人留下来。乌鸦在上空盘旋、落地啄食。他看到凯冯爵士派出中军支援前锋，大批长枪兵将北方人逼回丘陵，两军正在缓坡上作殊死搏斗，长枪方阵碰上了又一堵由椭圆铁钉盾构成的墙垒。他一边看，只见空中又洒下一阵箭雨，盾墙后的士兵在无情的炮火下纷纷倒地。“爵士先生，我想你们快输了。”他对被马压住的骑士说。对方没有答话。
“Small use you turned out to be,” Tyrion told him.
背后忽然传来蹄声，他急忙旋身，但由于手肘的剧痛，他已无法举剑作战。幸好来的是波隆，他勒住缰绳，往下看着他。
“It would seem you did well enough on your own,” Bronn answered. “You’ve lost the spike off your helm, though.”
“看来，你还真帮不了什么忙。”提利昂告诉他。
Tyrion groped at the top of the greathelm. The spike had snapped off clean. “I haven’t lost it. I know just where it is. Do you see my horse?”
“我看你靠自己也就够了。”波隆回答，“你只把头盔上的刺弄丢了。”
By the time they found it, the trumpets had sounded again and Lord Tywin’s reserve came sweeping up along the river. Tyrion watched his father fly past, the crimson-and-gold banner of Lannister rippling over his head as he thundered across the field. Five hundred knights surrounded him, sunlight flashing off the points of their lances. The remnants of the Stark lines shattered like glass beneath the hammer of their charge.
提利昂伸手一摸，巨盔上的尖剌已然整个儿折断。“我没弄丢，我知道它在哪里。看到我的马了吗？”
With his elbow swollen and throbbing inside his armor, Tyrion made no attempt to join the slaughter. He and Bronn went looking for his men. Many he found among the dead. Ulf son of Umar lay in a pool of congealing blood, his arm gone at the elbow, a dozen of his Moon Brothers sprawled around him. Shagga was slumped beneath a tree, riddled with arrows, Conn’s head in his lap. Tyrion thought they were both dead, but as he dismounted, Shagga opened his eyes and said, “They have killed Conn son of Coratt.” Handsome Conn had no mark but for the red stain over his breast, where the spear thrust had killed him. When Bronn pulled Shagga to his feet, the big man seemed to notice the arrows for the first time. He plucked them out one by one, cursing the holes they had made in his layers of mail and leather, and yowling like a babe at the few that had buried themselves in his flesh. Chella daughter of Cheyk rode up as they were yanking arrows out of Shagga, and showed them four ears she had taken. Timett they discovered looting the bodies of the slain with his Burned Men. Of the three hundred clansmen who had ridden to battle behind Tyrion Lannister, perhaps half had survived.
等他们找到马，喇叭又再度响起，泰温公爵的预备队倾巢而出，沿着河岸朝敌军冲去。提利昂看着父亲急驰而过，身边围绕着五百名骑士，阳光在枪尖闪耀，兰尼斯特家族的红金旗帜在头顶飞扬。史塔克家的残余部队在冲击下彻底溃散，有如被铁锤敲打的玻璃。
He left the living to look after the dead, sent Bronn to take charge of his captive knight, and went alone in search of his father. Lord Tywin was seated by the river, sipping wine from a jeweled cup as his squire undid the fastenings on his breastplate. “A fine victory,” Ser Kevan said when he saw Tyrion. “Your wild men fought well.”
提利昂盔甲下的手肘又肿又痛，他也就没参加最后的屠杀，转而和波隆前去寻找他的手下。许多人都是在死人堆里找到的。乌玛尔之子乌尔夫倒在一滩渐渐凝固的血泊里，右手肘以下全部不见，身旁还倒卧了十几个月人部的同胞。夏嘎颓然靠坐在一棵树下，全身插满了箭，康恩的头枕在他膝上。提利昂本以为他俩都死了，但当他下马时，夏嘎却睁开了眼睛：“他们杀了科拉特之子康恩。”英俊的康恩身上没有任何伤痕，只有长枪贯穿胸膛的一个红点。波隆扶夏嘎站起来，大个子仿佛这才注意到身上的箭，便一枝枝拔出来，一边抱怨弓箭把他的盔甲和皮革插出一堆窟窿。有几枝箭射进体内，拔得他像个婴儿似喊痛。当他们为夏嘎拔箭时，齐克之女齐拉骑马过来，向他们展示她割取的四只耳朵。提魅则率领灼人部众掠夺被他们杀掉的死人。跟随提利昂·兰尼斯特上战场的三百名原住民，大约只有半数幸存。
His father’s eyes were on him, pale green flecked with gold, so cool they gave Tyrion a chill. “Did that surprise you, Father?” he asked. “Did it upset your plans? We were supposed to be butchered, were we not?”
他让生者打理死者，派波隆去处置被他俘虏的骑士，然后独自去找父亲。泰温公爵坐在河边，正拿一个镶珠宝的杯子喝酒，并让他的侍从为他解开战甲的环扣。“一场漂亮的胜仗。”凯冯爵士看到提利昂，便对他说，“你的野人打得很好。”
Lord Tywin drained his cup, his face expressionless. “I put the least disciplined men on the left, yes. I anticipated that they would break. Robb Stark is a green boy, more like to be brave than wise. I’d hoped that if he saw our left collapse, he might plunge into the gap, eager for a rout. Once he was fully committed, Ser Kevan’s pikes would wheel and take him in the flank, driving him into the river while I brought up the reserve.”
父亲那双淡绿金瞳看着他，冷酷得令他打颤。“父亲，是不是教您很吃惊啊？”他问，“有没有破坏您的计划啊？我们本该被敌人屠杀的，是不是这样？”
“And you thought it best to place me in the midst of this carnage, yet keep me ignorant of your plans.”
泰温公爵一饮而尽，脸上毫无表情。“是的，我把无纪律的部队安排在左翼，预期他们会溃败。罗柏·史塔克是个毛头小鬼，想必勇气多于睿智，我原本希望他一见我左军崩溃，便全力突进，企图侧面包抄。等他进了圈套，凯冯爵士的长枪兵便会转身攻他侧翼，把他逼进河里，这时我再派出预备队。”
“A feigned rout is less convincing,” his father said, “and I am not inclined to trust my plans to a man who consorts with sellswords and savages.”
“您把我丢进这场大屠杀，却不肯把计划告诉我。”
“A pity my savages ruined your dance.” Tyrion pulled off his steel gauntlet and let it fall to the ground, wincing at the pain that stabbed up his arm.
“佯攻难以让人信服，”父亲回答，“何况我不能把计划透漏给与雇佣兵和野蛮人为伍的人。”
“The Stark boy proved more cautious than I expected for one of his years,” Lord Tywin admitted, “but a victory is a victory. You appear to be wounded.”
“真可惜我的野蛮人坏了您的大好兴致。”提利昂脱下钢护手，任它落地，因手肘的剧痛皱起眉头。
Tyrion’s right arm was soaked with blood. “Good of you to notice, Father,” he said through clenched teeth. “Might I trouble you to send for your maesters? Unless you relish the notion of having a one-armed dwarf for a son …”
“以史塔克那小鬼的年纪来说，他的用兵超乎预期地谨慎，”泰温公爵承认，“但胜利就是胜利。你似乎受伤了。”
An urgent shout of “Lord Tywin!” turned his father’s head before he could reply. Tywin Lannister rose to his feet as Ser Addam Marbrand leapt down off his courser. The horse was lathered and bleeding from the mouth. Ser Addam dropped to one knee, a rangy man with dark copper hair that fell to his shoulders, armored in burnished bronzed steel with the fiery tree of his House etched black on his breastplate. “My liege, we have taken some of their commanders. Lord Cerwyn, Ser Wylis Manderly, Harrion Karstark, four Freys. Lord Hornwood is dead, and I fear Roose Bolton has escaped us.”
提利昂的右臂染满鲜血。“父亲，谢谢您的关心，”他咬牙道，“可否麻烦你派个学士来帮我看看？莫非您觉得有个独臂的侏儒儿子也不赖……”
“And the boy?” Lord Tywin asked.
父亲还不及回答，只听一声急切的喊叫：“泰温大人！”，他便转过头去。亚当·马尔布兰爵士翻身下马，泰温公爵起立迎接。那匹马则口吐白沫，嘴流鲜血。亚当爵士生得高瘦，一头暗铜色及肩长发，穿着发亮的镀铜钢铠，胸甲中央有一棵象征家徽的燃烧之树。他在父亲面前单膝跪下，“公爵阁下，我们俘虏了部分敌方头目，包括赛文伯爵、威里斯·曼德勒爵士、哈利昂·卡史塔克和四个佛雷家的人。霍伍德伯爵战死。至于卢斯·波顿，恐怕已经逃了。”
Ser Addam hesitated. “The Stark boy was not with them, my lord. They say he crossed at the Twins with the great part of his horse, riding hard for Riverrun.”
“那小鬼呢？”泰温公爵问。
A green boy , Tyrion remembered, more like to be brave than wise . He would have laughed, if he hadn’t hurt so much.
亚当爵士迟疑片刻。“大人，史塔克那小鬼没和他们一道，他们说他已从孪河城渡河，带着骑兵主力，赶赴奔流城。”
*CATELYN
好个毛头小鬼，提利昂想起父亲刚才的话，想必勇气多于睿智。若不是手痛得厉害，他一定会哈哈大笑。
T he woods were full of whispers.
第六十四章 凯特琳
Moonlight winked on the tumbling waters of the stream below as it wound its rocky way along the floor of the valley. Beneath the trees, warhorses whickered softly and pawed at the moist, leafy ground, while men made nervous jests in hushed voices. Now and again, she heard the chink of spears, the faint metallic slither of chain mail, but even those sounds were muffled.
林间轻响，絮绕耳际。
“It should not be long now, my lady,” Hallis Mollen said. He had asked for the honor of protecting her in the battle to come; it was his right, as Winterfell’s captain of guards, and Robb had not refused it to him. She had thirty men around her, charged to keep her unharmed and see her safely home to Winterfell if the fighting went against them. Robb had wanted fifty; Catelyn had insisted that ten would be enough, that he would need every sword for the fight. They made their peace at thirty, neither happy with it.
谷底溪水奔流，蜿蜒穿过石板河床，月光在水面粼粼波动。树下，战马轻声嘶鸣，伸蹄扒开覆满落叶的湿软地面。人们压低声音，紧张地开着玩笑。她不时听见长枪的碰撞和锁子甲滑动所发出的微弱声响，但即便这些声音，也显得朦胧模糊。
“It will come when it comes,” Catelyn told him. When it came, she knew it would mean death. Hal’s death perhaps … or hers, or Robb’s. No one was safe. No life was certain. Catelyn was content to wait, to listen to the whispers in the woods and the faint music of the brook, to feel the warm wind in her hair.
“夫人，等不了多久了。”哈里斯·莫兰道。他要求在这场战事中有幸担负起保护她的责任，身为临冬城侍卫队长，这本是他的权利，罗柏也没拒绝。她身边还围绕着三十个卫士，他们的任务只是保护她免遭任何伤害，倘若战事不利，则务必将她安然护送回临冬城。罗柏原本要派出五十人，凯特琳坚持这场仗他需要所有的人手，因此十个就够了，最后他们达成妥协，改派三十名卫士，但双方都怏怏不乐。
She was no stranger to waiting, after all. Her men had always made her wait. “Watch for me, little cat,” her father would always tell her, when he rode off to court or fair or battle. And she would, standing patiently on the battlements of Riverrun as the waters of the Red Fork and the Tumblestone flowed by. He did not always come when he said he would, and days would ofttimes pass as Catelyn stood her vigil, peering out between crenels and through arrow loops until she caught a glimpse of Lord Hoster on his old brown gelding, trotting along the river-shore toward the landing. “Did you watch for me?” he’d ask when he bent to hug her. “Did you, little cat?”
“该来的时刻自然会来。”凯特琳告诉他。当战事到来的时刻，她知道那将意味着死亡，或许是哈尔的死……也或许是她的，甚至是罗柏。在战争中无人安全，任何人的性命都有危险，所以凯特琳宁愿等待，静听林间轻响、溪涧乐音，感受暖风拂过发丝。
Brandon Stark had bid her wait as well. “I shall not be long, my lady,” he had vowed. “We will be wed on my return.” Yet when the day came at last, it was his brother Eddard who stood beside her in the sept.
再怎么说，等待对她来说毫不陌生，她生命中的男人总是让她等待。“小凯特，等我回来哟。”每次父亲上朝、上集或远赴沙场，总是这么对她说。她也乖乖听话，耐心地站在奔流城的城垛上，看着红叉河和腾石河水奔涌流过。他每每不能准时归来，于是凯特琳也在城墙上终日守望，透过雉堞和箭孔向外眺望，直到终于瞥见霍斯特公爵骑着那头棕色老马，沿着河岸，快步朝渡口奔来。“你有没有等我啊？”当他弯身搂抱她时，一定会这么问，“有没有啊，小凯特？”
Ned had lingered scarcely a fortnight with his new bride before he too had ridden off to war with promises on his lips. At least he had left her with more than words; he had given her a son. Nine moons had waxed and waned, and Robb had been born in Riverrun while his father still warred in the south. She had brought him forth in blood and pain, not knowing whether Ned would ever see him. Her son. He had been so small …
布兰登·史塔克也教她等了好久。“夫人，此行不会太长。”他曾郑重发誓，“等我回来，咱们便可成婚。”然而当成婚那天终于来临，与她并肩站在圣堂的却是他的弟弟艾德。
And now it was for Robb that she waited … for Robb, and for Jaime Lannister, the gilded knight who men said had never learned to wait at all. “The Kingslayer is restless, and quick to anger,” her uncle Brynden had told Robb. And he had wagered their lives and their best hope of victory on the truth of what he said.
奈德与新娘相守不足两周，便又快马赶赴战场，只留下一个又一个承诺。好歹他留下的不只是空洞的话语，他还给了她一个儿子。月盈月缺，转眼九个月过去，罗柏诞生于奔流城，他的父亲却还在南方作战。她历经莫大痛苦，把浑身是血的罗柏带来人世，却不知奈德今生有无机会见到他。她的儿子啊，当时的他好小好小……
If Robb was frightened, he gave no sign of it. Catelyn watched her son as he moved among the men, touching one on the shoulder, sharing a jest with another, helping a third to gentle an anxious horse. His armor clinked softly when he moved. Only his head was bare. Catelyn watched a breeze stir his auburn hair, so like her own, and wondered when her son had grown so big. Fifteen, and near as tall as she was.
如今，她等待的对象变成了罗柏……以及詹姆·兰尼斯特，那个金光闪闪，传说从不知等待为何物的骑士。“弑君者暴躁易怒。”布林登叔叔对罗柏这么说，他则以所有人的性命和惟一的希望为赌注，押在这句话上面。
Let him grow taller , she asked the gods. Let him know sixteen, and twenty, and fifty. Let him grow as tall as his father, and hold his own son in his arms. Please, please , please . As she watched him, this tall young man with the new beard and the direwolf prowling at his heels, all she could see was the babe they had laid at her breast at Riverrun, so long ago.
罗柏即便心里害怕，也一点没表现出来。凯特琳看着他在队伍里走动，拍拍这人肩膀，和那人同声说笑，又协助另一人安抚焦躁不安的马匹。他的盔甲随着移动轻声作响，全身上下只有头部暴露在外。微风吹动他的枣红头发，那头和自己一模一样的红发，她不禁讶异儿子何时长得这么高大。才十五岁呢，已经快跟她一般高了。
The night was warm, but the thought of Riverrun was enough to make her shiver. Where are they? she wondered. Could her uncle have been wrong? So much rested on the truth of what he had told them. Robb had given the Blackfish three hundred picked men, and sent them ahead to screen his march. “Jaime does not know,” Ser Brynden said when he rode back. “I’ll stake my life on that. No bird has reached him, my archers have seen to that. We’ve seen a few of his outriders, but those that saw us did not live to tell of it. He ought to have sent out more. He does not know.”
请让他长得更高，她祈求天上诸神，让他活过十六岁、二十岁、五十岁，让他变得和他父亲一样高大，让他有机会把儿子抱在怀中，求求你们，求求你们，求求你们。她看着面前这个留了新胡子，脚边跟了一条冰原狼的高大青年，眼中所见却是那个他们放在她怀中的小婴儿。那是好久好久以前，发生在奔流城的事了。
“How large is his host?” her son asked.
夜空虽暖，想到奔流城却令她打起冷颤。他们究竟在哪里？她纳闷。莫非叔叔出错了？一切的一切，都维系在他的承诺上。罗柏拨给黑鱼三百精兵，派他趋前掩护主力部队的行踪。“詹姆不知情，”布林登爵士回来报告，“我敢拿性命担保。我的弓箭手没让任何一只乌飞回他那里。我们遇到了几个他的斥候，那些人也都无法回去通报了。他应该派出更多人才对。总而言之，他不清楚我们的行踪。”
“Twelve thousand foot, scattered around the castle in three separate camps, with the rivers between,” her uncle said, with the craggy smile she remembered so well. “There is no other way to besiege Riverrun, yet still, that will be their undoing. Two or three thousand horse.”
“他的部队规模如何？”儿子问。
“The Kingslayer has us three to one,” said Galbart Glover.
“总共一万两千步兵，分居三处营地，散于城堡周围，彼此间有河水相隔。”叔叔边说边露出一抹粗犷的微笑，令她觉得好熟悉。“包围奔流城，这是惟一的方法，但这也将是他们的致命伤。对方的骑兵约莫两三千。”
“True enough,” Ser Brynden said, “yet there is one thing Ser Jaime lacks.”
“弑君者的兵力将近我们三倍。”盖伯特·葛洛佛道。
“Yes?” Robb asked.
“不错，”布林登爵士，“但詹姆爵士缺乏一样东西。”
“Patience.”
“缺什么？”罗柏问。
Their host was greater than it had been when they left the Twins. Lord Jason Mallister had brought his power out from Seagard to join them as they swept around the headwaters of the Blue Fork and galloped south, and others had crept forth as well, hedge knights and small lords and masterless men-at-arms who had fled north when her brother Edmure’s army was shattered beneath the walls of Riverrun. They had driven their horses as hard as they dared to reach this place before Jaime Lannister had word of their coming, and now the hour was at hand.
“耐心。”
Catelyn watched her son mount up. Olyvar Frey held his horse for him, Lord Walder’s son, two years older than Robb, and ten years younger and more anxious. He strapped Robb’s shield in place and handed up his helm. When he lowered it over the face she loved so well, a tall young knight sat on his grey stallion where her son had been. It was dark among the trees, where the moon did not reach. When Robb turned his head to look at her, she could see only black inside his visor. “I must ride down the line, Mother,” he told her. “Father says you should let the men see you before a battle.”
比之刚离开孪河城时，他们目前的兵力又增加了不少。绕过蓝叉河源头，调头往南急驰时，杰森·梅利斯特伯爵从海疆城带兵前来助阵，其他生力军也陆续加入，包括雇佣骑士、小诸侯和没了主子的散兵，他们是在她弟弟艾德慕的军队于奔流城下被击溃后，逃往北方的。人们极尽所能，催马前进，赶在詹姆·兰尼斯特接获消息以前来到此地。眼下，决战时刻已经来临。
“Go, then,” she said. “Let them see you.”
凯特琳看着儿子上马，瓦德侯爵的儿子奥利法·佛雷则为他拉住缰绳。奥利法较罗柏年长两岁，却幼稚得活像小他十岁，处处显得焦躁不安。他替罗柏绑好盾牌，递上头盔。儿子放下面罩，盖住那张她所深爱的脸庞，摇身一变，成为高大英挺的年轻骑士，端坐于灰色骏马之上。树林极暗，月光无法照及，所以当罗柏转头看她，面罩之下，她只见一片漆黑。“母亲，我得上前线去。”他告诉她，“父亲教导我，开战之前，要让部下看到首领与他们同在。”
“It will give them courage,” Robb said.
“去罢，”她说，“让他们好好看看你。”
And who will give me courage? she wondered, yet she kept her silence and made herself smile for him. Robb turned the big grey stallion and walked him slowly away from her, Grey Wind shadowing his steps. Behind him his battle guard formed up. When he’d forced Catelyn to accept her protectors, she had insisted that he be guarded as well, and the lords bannermen had agreed. Many of their sons had clamored for the honor of riding with the Young Wolf, as they had taken to calling him. Torrhen Karstark and his brother Eddard were among his thirty, and Patrek Mallister, Smalljon Umber, Daryn Hornwood, Theon Greyjoy, no less than five of Walder Frey’s vast brood, along with older men like Ser Wendel Manderly and Robin Flint. One of his companions was even a woman: Dacey Mormont, Lady Maege’s eldest daughter and heir to Bear Island, a lanky six-footer who had been given a morningstar at an age when most girls were given dolls. Some of the other lords muttered about that, but Catelyn would not listen to their complaints. “This is not about the honor of your houses,” she told them. “This is about keeping my son alive and whole.”
“我会给他们勇气。”罗柏道。
And if it comes to that , she wondered, will thirty be enough? Will six thousand be enough?
谁来给我勇气呢？她扪心自问。然而她保持缄默，逼着自己对他微笑。罗柏调转大灰马，缓缓离她远去，灰风如影随形地伴着他，他的贴身护卫们随即跟上。当他强迫凯特琳接受保护时，她坚持他也得照此办理，对此北境诸侯亦表赞同。众多封臣的子嗣都极力争取与少狼主——这是他们帮他新取的称号——并肩作战的荣耀。最后确定的三十人中包括托伦·卡史塔克与艾德·卡史塔克两兄弟，派崔克·梅利斯特，小琼恩·安柏，戴林恩·霍伍德，席恩·葛雷乔伊，瓦德·佛雷众多子孙中的五个，还有较年长的如文德尔·曼德勒爵士和罗宾·菲林特等等。其中甚至有一位女性，黛西·莫尔蒙，梅姬伯爵夫人的长女和熊岛继承人，身形瘦长，高达六呎，别的女孩还在玩洋娃娃的年纪，她便使起了流星锤。对这最后一项指派，诸侯们颇有微词，但凯特琳不理会他们的抱怨。“此事与家族名誉无关，”她告诉他们，“只为了确保我儿毫发无伤。”
A bird called faintly in the distance, a high sharp trill that felt like an icy hand on Catelyn’s neck. Another bird answered; a third, a fourth. She knew their call well enough, from her years at Winterfell. Snow shrikes. Sometimes you saw them in the deep of winter, when the godswood was white and still. They were northern birds.
到了生死关头，她心想，这三十人够吗？这里的六千人够吗？
They are coming , Catelyn thought.
远处传来一声微弱的鸟鸣，那是一种高亢而尖锐的颤音，有如一只冰冷的手，划过凯特琳颈背。又一只鸟颤鸣应和，接着是第三只、第四只。这是雪伯劳的呼唤，在临冬城的这么多年，她早已非常熟悉。凛冬深雪之时，当神木林白茫茫一片，寂静无声，便能看到它们的踪迹。它们是北方的鸟。
“They’re coming, my lady,” Hal Mollen whispered. He was always a man for stating the obvious. “Gods be with us.”
他们来了，凯特琳心想。
She nodded as the woods grew still around them. In the quiet she could hear them, far off yet moving closer; the tread of many horses, the rattle of swords and spears and armor, the murmur of human voices, with here a laugh, and there a curse.
“夫人，他们来了。”哈尔·莫兰悄声道。他总爱重复人尽皆知的事实。“愿诸神与我们同在。”
Eons seemed to come and go. The sounds grew louder. She heard more laughter, a shouted command, splashing as they crossed and recrossed the little stream. A horse snorted. A man swore. And then at last she saw him … only for an instant, framed between the branches of the trees as she looked down at the valley floor, yet she knew it was him. Even at a distance, Ser Jaime Lannister was unmistakable. The moonlight had silvered his armor and the gold of his hair, and turned his crimson cloak to black. He was not wearing a helm.
她点点头。周围的树林安静下来，四下寂然之中，她可以听见他们的声音，距离虽远，却在迅速逼近：万马奔腾之声，枪剑铠甲交击，战士喃喃自语，笑骂声此起彼落。
He was there and he was gone again, his silvery armor obscured by the trees once more. Others came behind him, long columns of them, knights and sworn swords and freeriders, three quarters of the Lannister horse.
亿万年的光阴仿佛来了又去，声音越变越大，她听见更多笑闹，有人发号施令，渡溪时水花飞扬。一匹马在哼气。某个男人在咒骂。最后她看到他了……虽然只是一刹那，虽然只是透过林间细缝望向谷底，但她深知必是他无疑。即便是在这么远的距离，詹姆·兰尼斯特爵士的身影依旧清晰可辨，他的金发金铠被月光染为银白，鲜红披风成了黑色。他没戴头盔。
“He is no man for sitting in a tent while his carpenters build siege towers,” Ser Brynden had promised. “He has ridden out with his knights thrice already, to chase down raiders or storm a stubborn holdfast.”
他甫一出现，便又消失，银色铠甲再度被树丛遮蔽。长长的队伍跟在他身后，包括骑士、誓言骑士和自由骑手，大概占兰尼斯特军骑兵总数的四分之三。
Nodding, Robb had studied the map her uncle had drawn him. Ned had taught him to read maps. “Raid him here,” he said, pointing. “A few hundred men, no more. Tully banners. When he comes after you, we will be waiting”—his finger moved an inch to the left—“here.”
“他绝不会乖乖待在营帐里，坐等木匠搭建攻城塔。”布林登爵士曾经保证。“迄今为止，他已三度率骑兵出击，追赶零散的我军或强攻顽抗的庄园。”
Here was a hush in the night, moonlight and shadows, a thick carpet of dead leaves underfoot, densely wooded ridges sloping gently down to the streambed, the underbrush thinning as the ground fell away.
于是罗柏点着头，仔细研读他舅舅绘制的地图。奈德教导他要熟悉地图。“你在这里袭击他，”他指着地图说，“带个两三百人就好，不要多，打着徒利家的旗帜。当他追过来时，我们会在——”他的手指向左移动一寸。“——这里埋伏。”
Here was her son on his stallion, glancing back at her one last time and lifting his sword in salute.
“这里”，夜幕中的一片寂静，月光倾洒，暗影幢幢，地面铺满厚厚落叶，山脊密林遍布，丘陵缓缓下降，直至河床。地势越低，矮树丛便越见稀疏。
Here was the call of Maege Mormont’s warhorn, a long low blast that rolled down the valley from the east, to tell them that the last of Jaime’s riders had entered the trap.
“这里”，他儿子骑在战马上，回望她最后一眼，举剑行礼。
And Grey Wind threw back his head and howled.
“这里”，梅姬·莫尔蒙奏出长而低沉的号角，自东侧轰然直下，炸进河谷，通知人们詹姆的部队已然全数进了圈套。
The sound seemed to go right through Catelyn Stark, and she found herself shivering. It was a terrible sound, a frightening sound, yet there was music in it too. For a second she felt something like pity for the Lannisters below. So this is what death sounds like , she thought.
灰风向后一甩头，仰天长嚎。
HAAroooooooooooooooooooooooo came the answer from the far ridge as the Greatjon winded his own horn. To east and west, the trumpets of the Mallisters and Freys blew vengeance. North, where the valley narrowed and bent like a cocked elbow, Lord Karstark’s warhorns added their own deep, mournful voices to the dark chorus. Men were shouting and horses rearing in the stream below.
狼嗥之声仿佛直直地穿透了凯特琳·史塔克，她发现自己浑身颤抖。这是一种恐怖之声，骇人之声，然而其中如有音律。一时之间，她竟为下方河谷里的兰尼斯特军感到一丝怜悯。这就是死亡之声，她心想。
The whispering wood let out its breath all at once, as the bowmen Robb had hidden in the branches of the trees let fly their arrows and the night erupted with the screams of men and horses. All around her, the riders raised their lances, and the dirt and leaves that had buried the cruel bright points fell away to reveal the gleam of sharpened steel. “Winterfell!” she heard Robb shout as the arrows sighed again. He moved away from her at a trot, leading his men downhill.
啊啊呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜呜……对面山脊传来大琼恩的号声，东西两边，梅利斯特家和佛雷家也吹起了复仇的喇叭。河谷的北口极窄，有如弯曲的手肘转了方向，卡史塔克伯爵的战号从那里传来，低沉浑厚，充满哀悼之音，加入了这场黑暗的大合唱。下方溪谷里，敌军高声叫喊，马儿前脚踢扬。
Catelyn sat on her horse, unmoving, with Hal Mollen and her guard around her, and she waited as she had waited before, for Brandon and Ned and her father. She was high on the ridge, and the trees hid most of what was going on beneath her. A heartbeat, two, four, and suddenly it was as if she and her protectors were alone in the wood. The rest were melted away into the green.
奉罗柏之命藏身枝干间的弓箭手们齐齐洒下箭雨，呓语森林用力吐出按捺多时的气息，整个夜晚顿时充斥人马哀嚎。她放眼四望，武士们纷纷举起长枪，褪去用来遮掩反光的泥土和树叶，露出锐利无比的残酷尖刃。“临冬城万岁！”当箭雨再度落下，她听见罗柏高喊。他从她身边急驰向前，当先率领部下朝河谷俯冲。
Yet when she looked across the valley to the far ridge, she saw the Greatjon’s riders emerge from the darkness beneath the trees. They were in a long line, an endless line, and as they burst from the wood there was an instant, the smallest part of a heartbeat, when all Catelyn saw was the moonlight on the points of their lances, as if a thousand willowisps were coming down the ridge, wreathed in silver flame.
凯特琳静坐马上，一动不动。哈尔·莫兰和贴身护卫们环绕四周，而她只是静静等待，一如当年等待布兰登，等待奈德，等待父亲。她置身高高的山脊上，树林几乎完全遮蔽了下方的战事。她的心狂乱地跳动，一下、两下、四下，突然间，森林里似乎只剩下她和她的护卫，余人皆已融进无边的绿色中。
Then she blinked, and they were only men, rushing down to kill or die.
然而，当她抬眼，望向河谷对面的山脊，却见到大琼恩的骑兵自密林黑影后现身，排成无止无尽的长长横队，开始冲锋。当他们自树林中激迸而出时，在那么细微的心跳瞬间，凯特琳看到月光洒落枪尖，仿如千只包裹银焰的萤火虫，朝山下扑去。
Afterward, she could not claim she had seen the battle. Yet she could hear, and the valley rang with echoes. The crack of a broken lance, the clash of swords, the cries of “Lannister” and “Winterfell” and “Tully! Riverrun and Tully!” When she realized there was no more to see, she closed her eyes and listened. The battle came alive around her. She heard hoofbeats, iron boots splashing in shallow water, the woody sound of swords on oaken shields and the scrape of steel against steel, the hiss of arrows, the thunder of drums, the terrified screaming of a thousand horses. Men shouted curses and begged for mercy, and got it (or not), and lived (or died). The ridges seemed to play queer tricks with sound. Once she heard Robb’s voice, as clear as if he’d been standing at her side, calling, “To me! To me!” And she heard his direwolf, snarling and growling, heard the snap of those long teeth, the tearing of flesh, shrieks of fear and pain from man and horse alike. Was there only one wolf? It was hard to be certain.
她眨眨眼。他们不过是人，朝山谷俯冲的战士，要么杀人，要么被杀。
Little by little, the sounds dwindled and died, until at last there was only the wolf. As a red dawn broke in the east, Grey Wind began to howl again.
事后她虽不能宣称亲睹战事，却至少可说听闻全程。河谷里回音激荡，有断折长枪的劈啪，刀剑交击的响动，以及“兰尼斯特万岁！”“临冬城万岁！”和“徒利家万岁！为奔流城与徒利家而战！”的呐喊。当她明白睁眼无益，便闭上双眼，凝神谛听。她听见马蹄奔波，铁靴溅起浅水，剑劈橡木盾的钝音，钢铁碰撞的摩擦，弓箭呼啸，战鼓雷鸣，一千匹马同时发出惊叫。人们或高声咒骂，或乞求饶命，或得免一死，或劫数难逃，有人得以生还，有人则命丧于此。山谷似乎会扰乱听觉，有一次，她仿佛听见了罗柏的声音，清楚得好似他就站在身边，高喊：“跟我来！跟我来！”接着她听到了那只冰原狼的嘶吼咆哮，利齿撕扯肉块，人马发出充满恐惧的痛苦哀嚎。真的只有一只狼？她难以分辨。
Robb came back to her on a different horse, riding a piebald gelding in the place of the grey stallion he had taken down into the valley. The wolf’s head on his shield was slashed half to pieces, raw wood showing where deep gouges had been hacked in the oak, but Robb himself seemed unhurt. Yet when he came closer, Catelyn saw that his mailed glove and the sleeve of his surcoat were black with blood. “You’re hurt,” she said.
声音渐渐变弱，终至平息，最后只剩狼嚎。几缕红曙露出东方，灰风仰天长啸。
Robb lifted his hand, opened and closed his fingers. “No,” he said. “This is … Torrhen’s blood, perhaps, or …” He shook his head. “I do not know.”
罗柏归来时，骑的已不是原本那匹灰马，而是一匹花斑马。他盾牌上的狼头几乎被砍成碎片，木板上刻画出深深的痕迹，但本人似乎安然无恙。然而当他走近，凯特琳却发现他的锁甲手套和外衣袖子上全是黑血。“你受伤了。”她说。
A mob of men followed him up the slope, dirty and dented and grinning, with Theon and the Greatjon at their head. Between them they dragged Ser Jaime Lannister. They threw him down in front of her horse. “The Kingslayer,” Hal announced, unnecessarily.
罗柏举起手，伸了伸五指。“我没事，”他说，“这……或许是托伦的血，或是……”他摇摇头。“我不知道。”
Lannister raised his head. “Lady Stark,” he said from his knees. Blood ran down one cheek from a gash across his scalp, but the pale light of dawn had put the glint of gold back in his hair. “I would offer you my sword, but I seem to have mislaid it.”
一大群人跟着他上了斜坡，个个浑身脏污，盔甲凹陷，却嘻笑不停。席恩和大琼恩当先，两人一左一右跩着詹姆·兰尼斯特爵士。他们把他推到她的坐骑前。“弑君者。”哈尔又多此一举地宣示。
“It is not your sword I want, ser,” she told him. “Give me my father and my brother Edmure. Give me my daughters. Give me my lord husband.”
兰尼斯特抬起头。“史塔克夫人，”他跪着说，他头上有个伤口，鲜血自头顶流下一边脸颊，苍白的晨光将他头发的金黄还给了他。“很乐意为您效劳，可惜我忘了我的剑放哪儿去了。”
“I have mislaid them as well, I fear.”
“爵士阁下，我不需要你的效劳。”她告诉他，“我要的是我父亲和我弟弟艾德慕，我要我的两个女儿，以及我的丈夫。”
“A pity,” Catelyn said coldly.
“恐怕我也不知他们到哪儿去了。”
“Kill him, Robb,” Theon Greyjoy urged. “Take his head off.”
“实在可惜。”凯特琳冷冷地说。
“No,” her son answered, peeling off his bloody glove. “He’s more use alive than dead. And my lord father never condoned the murder of prisoners after a battle.”
“杀了他，罗柏。”席恩·葛雷乔伊劝道，“砍他的头。”
“A wise man,” Jaime Lannister said, “and honorable.”
“不，”儿子回答，一边把染血的手套脱下。“他活着比较有用。况且父亲大人绝不会在战后杀害俘虏。”
“Take him away and put him in irons,” Catelyn said.
“他是个聪明人，”詹姆·兰尼斯特道，“光明磊落。”
“Do as my lady mother says,” Robb commanded, “and make certain there’s a strong guard around him. Lord Karstark will want his head on a pike.”
“把他带走，戴上镣铐，”凯特琳说。
“That he will,” the Greatjon agreed, gesturing. Lannister was led away to be bandaged and chained.
“照我母亲大人说的做，”罗柏下令，“此外，务必多派人严加看守。卡史塔克大人恨不得把他的头插在枪上。”
“Why should Lord Karstark want him dead?” Catelyn asked.
“我想也是。”大琼恩同意，他比比手势，兰尼斯特便被领开去，包扎伤口，并戴上枷锁。
Robb looked away into the woods, with the same brooding look that Ned often got. “He … he killed them …”
“卡史塔克大人为何想杀他？”凯特琳问。
“Lord Karstark’s sons,” Galbart Glover explained.
罗柏转头望向树林，眼中流露出奈德常有的忧郁神色。“他……杀了他们……”
“Both of them,” said Robb. “Torrhen and Eddard. And Daryn Hornwood as well.”
“卡史塔克大人的儿子。”盖伯特·葛洛佛解释。
“No one can fault Lannister on his courage,” Glover said. “When he saw that he was lost, he rallied his retainers and fought his way up the valley, hoping to reach Lord Robb and cut him down. And almost did.”
“两人都死在他手里，”罗柏说，“托伦和艾德，以及戴林恩·霍伍德。”
“He mislaid his sword in Eddard Karstark’s neck, after he took Torrhen’s hand off and split Daryn Hornwood’s skull open,” Robb said. “All the time he was shouting for me. If they hadn’t tried to stop him—”
“谁也不能否认兰尼斯特那厮的勇气，”葛洛佛道，“他眼看大势已去，便号召手下，一路往河谷杀上来，企图冲到罗柏大人身边将他砍倒，他差点就得逞了。”
“—I should then be mourning in place of Lord Karstark,” Catelyn said. “Your men did what they were sworn to do, Robb. They died protecting their liege lord. Grieve for them. Honor them for their valor. But not now. You have no time for grief. You may have lopped the head off the snake, but three quarters of the body is still coiled around my father’s castle. We have won a battle, not a war.”
“他忘了他的剑放哪儿……他的剑先砍断托伦的手，劈开戴林恩的脑袋，然后忘在了艾德·卡史塔克的颈子上。”罗柏说，“从头到尾，他一直叫喊着我的名字，若非大家死命阻止他——”
“But such a battle!” said Theon Greyjoy eagerly. “My lady, the realm has not seen such a victory since the Field of Fire. I vow, the Lannisters lost ten men for every one of ours that fell. We’ve taken close to a hundred knights captive, and a dozen lords bannermen. Lord Westerling, Lord Banefort, Ser Garth Greenfield, Lord Estren, Ser Tytos Brax, Mallor the Dornishman … and three Lannisters besides Jaime, Lord Tywin’s own nephews, two of his sister’s sons and one of his dead brother’s …”
“——如今哀悼者就是我，而非卡史塔克大人了。”凯特琳道，“罗柏，你的部下完成了他们宣誓信守的职责，为保护他们的封君而英勇战死。你可以为他们哀悼，表彰他们的忠勇，但不是现在，你没有悲伤的时间。你砍断了蛇头，然而四分之三的蛇身还缠绕着你外公的城堡。我们打赢了一场仗，但不是整个战争。”
“And Lord Tywin?” Catelyn interrupted. “Have you perchance taken Lord Tywin, Theon?”
“但这是多么辉煌的一场仗啊！”席恩·葛雷乔伊兴奋地说，“夫人，自古代‘怒火燎原’一役以来，王国便再没有如此精彩的战役。我敢发誓，兰尼斯特那边每死十个，我们才死一个。我们俘虏了近百名骑士，十来个诸侯，包括维斯特林伯爵、班佛特伯爵、盖尔斯·格林菲尔爵士、伊斯兰伯爵、泰陀斯·布拉克斯爵士、多恩人马洛尔……除詹姆外，我们还抓到三个兰尼斯特家的人，都是泰温大人的侄子，其中两个是他妹妹的，一个是他死去的老弟的……”
“No,” Greyjoy answered, brought up short.
“那泰温大人呢？”凯特琳打断他。“席恩，请问你有没有刚巧把泰温大人也抓到？”
“Until you do, this war is far from done.”
“没有。”葛雷乔伊回答，他突然愣住了。
Robb raised his head and pushed his hair back out of his eyes. “My mother is right. We still have Riverrun.”
“只要还没抓到他，战争就没有结束。”
*DAENERYS
罗柏抬起头，用手将红发从眼前拨开。“母亲说得对，奔流城之战还等着我们。”
T he flies circled Khal Drogo slowly, their wings buzzing, a low thrum at the edge of hearing that filled Dany with dread.
第六十五章 丹妮莉丝
The sun was high and pitiless. Heat shimmered in waves off the stony outcrops of low hills. A thin finger of sweat trickled slowly between Dany’s swollen breasts. The only sounds were the steady clop of their horses’ hooves, the rhythmic tingle of the bells in Drogo’s hair, and the distant voices behind them.
成群苍蝇围绕着卓戈卡奥，缓缓打转，翅膀嗡嗡的声音在丹妮的听觉边际回环，令她满怀恐惧。
Dany watched the flies.
无情的骄阳高挂天空，热气从低矮丘陵裸露的岩层间蒸散而出。汗水如一根根纤细的手指，自丹妮肿胀的双乳缓缓流下。天地间，惟一的声音是马蹄坚定的哒哒声，丹妮发际铃铛有韵律的轻响，以及身后悄声的交谈。
They were as large as bees, gross, purplish, glistening. The Dothraki called them bloodflies . They lived in marshes and stagnant pools, sucked blood from man and horse alike, and laid their eggs in the dead and dying. Drogo hated them. Whenever one came near him, his hand would shoot out quick as a striking snake to close around it. She had never seen him miss. He would hold the fly inside his huge fist long enough to hear its frantic buzzing. Then his fingers would tighten, and when he opened his hand again, the fly would be only a red smear on his palm.
丹妮盯着苍蝇。
Now one crept across the rump of his stallion, and the horse gave an angry flick of its tail to brush it away. The others flitted about Drogo, closer and closer. The khal did not react. His eyes were fixed on distant brown hills, the reins loose in his hands. Beneath his painted vest, a plaster of fig leaves and caked blue mud covered the wound on his breast. The herbwomen had made it for him. Mirri Maz Duur’s poultice had itched and burned, and he had torn it off six days ago, cursing her for a maegi . The mud plaster was more soothing, and the herbwomen made him poppy wine as well. He’d been drinking it heavily these past three days; when it was not poppy wine, it was fermented mare’s milk or pepper beer.
它们大如蜜蜂，体形沉重，略呈紫色，发出湿黏而恶心的光。多斯拉克人称其为“血蝇”。它们居住于沼泽地和死水潭，以吸食人马鲜血为生，并在腐尸或濒死的人畜身上产卵。卓戈恨极了这种生物，每当有血蝇靠近，他的手便如灵蛇般迅速窜出，一把抓住，她从未见他失手过。他会把苍蝇握在巨掌里，听任它狂乱地嗡嗡乱飞，最后才用力捏紧，等张开手，苍蝇已成为他掌心的一滩红印。
Yet he scarcely touched his food, and he thrashed and groaned in the night. Dany could see how drawn his face had become. Rhaego was restless in her belly, kicking like a stallion, yet even that did not stir Drogo’s interest as it had. Every morning her eyes found fresh lines of pain on his face when he woke from his troubled sleep. And now this silence. It was making her afraid. Since they had mounted up at dawn, he had said not a word. When she spoke, she got no answer but a grunt, and not even that much since midday.
这时，有一只血蝇在他坐骑的臀部爬来爬去，骏马愤怒地甩着尾巴，想把它赶走。其他苍蝇则在卓戈周围来回飞动，越飞越近，然而卡奥却没有反应。他的视线朝向远方的褐色丘陵，缰绳松松垮垮地垂在手中。在他的彩绘背心下，一层无花果叶和干涸的蓝泥覆盖着胸前的伤口，那是草药妇人专为他调制的。弥丽·马兹·笃尔的药膏不仅灼热，更令他搔痒难耐，因此六天前他便已撕掉膏药，骂她是“巫魔女”。泥膏比较舒服，况且草药妇人还为他调制了罂粟酒，这三天来他喝得厉害；即便不喝罂粟酒，他也豪饮发酵马奶或胡椒啤酒。
One of the bloodflies landed on the bare skin of the khal’s shoulder. Another, circling, touched down on his neck and crept up toward his mouth. Khal Drogo swayed in the saddle, bells ringing, as his stallion kept onward at a steady walking pace.
然而他却几乎不碰食物，到了夜里则是又踢打又呻吟。丹妮看得出，他的脸变得好削瘦。雷戈在她的肚子里不断骚动，活像一匹骏马，但丝毫没有引起卓戈的兴趣。每天早上，当他从噩梦中醒来，她便发现他的脸上又多了新的痛苦痕迹。眼下，他竟连话也不说了，使她倍感惊恐。是啊，自从他们日出时出发以来，他连一个字也没有说。即便她主动开口，得到的也只是一声咕哝，过了中午，连咕哝都没了。
Dany pressed her heels into her silver and rode closer. “My lord,” she said softly. “Drogo. My sun-and-stars.”
一只血蝇降落在卡奥裸露的肩膀上，另外一只则盘旋片刻，停上了他脖子，并朝他嘴巴爬去。卓戈卡奥在马鞍上微微晃动，发际铃铛轻声作响，坐骑则以稳定的步伐继续前进。
He did not seem to hear. The bloodfly crawled up under his drooping mustache and settled on his cheek, in the crease beside his nose. Dany gasped, “Drogo,” Clumsily she reached over and touched his arm.
丹妮夹紧银马，骑到他身旁。“夫君，”她轻声说，“卓戈，我的日和星。”
Khal Drogo reeled in the saddle, tilted slowly, and fell heavily from his horse. The flies scattered for a heartbeat, and then circled back to settle on him where he lay.
他似乎根本没听见。血蝇顺着他长长的胡子往上爬，爬上脸颊，停在鼻子旁的皱痕里。丹妮惊讶得屏住呼吸。“卓戈，”她笨拙地伸手去扶他的臂膀。
“No,” Dany said, reining up. Heedless of her belly for once, she scrambled off her silver and ran to him.
卓戈卡奥在马鞍上晃了晃，缓缓倾斜，重重地从马上摔了下去。血蝇群散开了一个心跳的瞬间，随即又徘徊而回，停在他身上。
The grass beneath him was brown and dry. Drogo cried out in pain as Dany knelt beside him. His breath rattled harshly in his throat, and he looked at her without recognition. “My horse,” he gasped. Dany brushed the flies off his chest, smashing one as he would have. His skin burned beneath her fingers.
“不，”丹妮连忙勒住缰绳，不顾自己的大肚子，蹒跚着翻下小银马，奔向他身边。
The khal’s bloodriders had been following just behind them. She heard Haggo shout as they galloped up. Cohollo vaulted from his horse. “Blood of my blood,” he said as he dropped to his knees. The other two kept to their mounts.
他身下的草地棕黄干枯。当丹妮在他身边跪下时，卓戈发出痛苦的叫喊。他的呼吸卡在喉咙里，看她的眼神仿佛不认得她。“我的马。”他喘着气说。丹妮挥开他胸膛上的苍蝇，学他的样子捏死了一只。手指下，他的皮肤烫得吓人。
“No,” Khal Drogo groaned, struggling in Dany’s arms. “Must ride. Ride. No.”
卡奥的血盟卫就跟在后面。她听见哈戈大喊，他们快马加鞭地赶来。科霍罗自马背一跃而下。“吾血之血！”他边跪边喊。其他两人则留在马上。
“He fell from his horse,” Haggo said, staring down. His broad face was impassive, but his voice was leaden.
“不，”卓戈卡奥呻吟着在丹妮怀中挣扎。“必须骑马。骑马。不。”
“You must not say that,” Dany told him. “We have ridden far enough today. We will camp here.”
“他从自己的马上摔下来。”哈戈瞪着脚下的他们说，他那张阔脸毫无表情，但声音如铅般沉重。
“Here?” Haggo looked around them. The land was brown and sere, inhospitable. “This is no camping ground.”
“别说这种话，”丹妮告诉他，“今天我们骑得也够远了，就在这里扎营。”
“It is not for a woman to bid us halt,” said Qotho, “not even a khaleesi.”
“这里？”哈戈环顾四周。此地植物干枯，一片棕黄，不适人居。“这里不能扎营。”
“We camp here,” Dany repeated. “Haggo, tell them Khal Drogo commanded the halt. If any ask why, say to them that my time is near and I could not continue. Cohollo, bring up the slaves, they must put up the khal’s tent at once. Qotho—”
“女人无权命令我们停下，”柯索说，“即便卡丽熙也不例外。”
“You do not command me, Khaleesi,” Qotho said.
“我们就在这里扎营。”丹妮重复，“哈戈，传话下去，就说卓戈卡奥命令大家停下。若有人问起原因，就说我快生了，无法再走。科霍罗，把奴隶带来，让他们立刻搭起卡奥的帐篷。柯索——”
“Find Mirri Maz Duur,” she told him. The godswife would be walking among the other Lamb Men, in the long column of slaves. “Bring her to me, with her chest.”
“卡丽熙，你无权命令我。”柯索说。
Qotho glared down at her, his eyes hard as flint. “The maegi.” He spat. “This I will not do.”
“你去把弥丽·马兹·笃尔找来。”她告诉他。女祭司应该和其他“羊人”一起，位于长长的奴隶队伍中。“带她来见我，叫她把药箱也带来。”
“You will,” Dany said, “or when Drogo wakes, he will hear why you defied me.”
柯索从马上瞪着她，两眼刚硬如燧石。“巫魔女，”他啐了一口，“我不干。”
Furious, Qotho wheeled his stallion around and galloped off in anger … but Dany knew he would return with Mirri Maz Duur, however little he might like it. The slaves erected Khal Drogo’s tent beneath a jagged outcrop of black rock whose shadow gave some relief from the heat of the afternoon sun. Even so, it was stifling under the sandsilk as Irri and Doreah helped Dany walk Drogo inside. Thick patterned carpets had been laid down over the ground, and pillows scattered in the corners. Eroeh, the timid girl Dany had rescued outside the mud walls of the Lamb Men, set up a brazier. They stretched Drogo out on a woven mat. “No,” he muttered in the Common Tongue. “No, no.” It was all he said, all he seemed capable of saying.
“你立刻去办，”丹妮说，“否则等卓戈醒来，他会想知道你为何忤逆我。”
Doreah unhooked his medallion belt and stripped off his vest and leggings, while Jhiqui knelt by his feet to undo the laces of his riding sandals. Irri wanted to leave the tent flaps open to let in the breeze, but Dany forbade it. She would not have any see Drogo this way, in delirium and weakness. When her khas came up, she posted them outside at guard. “Admit no one without my leave,” she told Jhogo. “No one.”
柯索愤怒地调转马头，飞奔而去……但丹妮知道，无论他多么不情愿，终究是会把弥丽·马兹·笃尔带来的。奴隶们在一片崎岖的黑色岩层下搭起卓戈卡奥的大帐，那里的阴影可以稍稍遮挡午后的骄阳。即便如此，当伊丽和多莉亚协助丹妮搀扶卓戈走进沙丝帐时，里面依旧热得令人窒息。地上铺着厚重的绘画地毯，枕头散置于角落。埃萝叶，那个丹妮在“羊人”城镇的泥墙外解救的羞怯女孩，已经燃起一个火盆。他们让卓戈平躺在草席上。“不，”他用通用语呢喃着，“不，不。”他只说得出这个字，仿佛这是他能力惟一所及。
Eroeh stared fearfully at Drogo where he lay. “He dies,” she whispered.
多莉亚解开他的奖章腰带，脱下他的背心和绑腿，姬琪则跪在他脚边，为他解开骑马凉鞋。伊丽想让帐篷敞开通风，但丹妮不准，她绝不能让别人看见卓戈神智不清的虚弱模样。当她的卡斯部众抵达时，她要他们守在门口。“未经我允许，不准任何人进来。”她对乔戈说，“谁都不行。”
Dany slapped her. “The khal cannot die. He is the father of the stallion who mounts the world. His hair has never been cut. He still wears the bells his father gave him.”
埃萝叶畏惧地看着躺在席上的卓戈。“他死了。”她小声说。
“Khaleesi,” Jhiqui said, “he fell from his horse.”
丹妮抽了她一个耳光。“卡奥不会死，他是骑着世界的骏马之父，他的头发从未修剪，至今依旧绑着他父亲留给他的铃铛。”
Trembling, her eyes full of sudden tears, Dany turned away from them. He fell from his horse! It was so, she had seen it, and the bloodriders, and no doubt her handmaids and the men of her khas as well. And how many more? They could not keep it secret, and Dany knew what that meant. A khal who could not ride could not rule, and Drogo had fallen from his horse.
“可是，卡丽熙，”姬琪道，“他从自己的马上摔下来。”
“We must bathe him,” she said stubbornly. She must not allow herself to despair. “Irri, have the tub brought at once. Doreah, Eroeh, find water, cool water, he’s so hot.” He was a fire in human skin.
丹妮眼中突然盈满泪水，她颤抖着别过头去。他从自己的马上摔下来！的确如此，不仅她亲眼目睹，血盟卫看到了，目击者还包括她的女仆和卡斯部众。除此之外还有多少呢？他们不可能保守秘密，丹妮知道这意味着什么：无法骑马的卡奥便无能统治，而卓戈竟从自己的马上摔了下去。
The slaves set up the heavy copper tub in the corner of the tent. When Doreah brought the first jar of water, Dany wet a length of silk to lay across Drogo’s brow, over the burning skin. His eyes looked at her, but he did not see. When his lips opened, no words escaped them, only a moan. “Where is Mirri Maz Duur?” she demanded, her patience rubbed raw with fear.
“我们必须帮他沐浴。”她固执地说。她绝不能让自己陷入绝望。“伊丽，叫人马上把澡盆搬来。多莉亚、埃萝叶，去找水，要凉水，他身体好烫。”他简直是人皮包裹的一团火。
“Qotho will find her,” Irri said.
奴隶们将沉重的赤铜澡盆放在帐篷角落。当多莉亚拿来第一罐水时，丹妮浸湿一卷丝布，盖在卓戈滚烫的额际。他双眼直视，却视而不见。他张开嘴巴，却说不出话，只有呻吟。“弥丽·马兹·笃尔在哪儿？”她的耐心快要被恐惧磨光，忍不住厉声质问。
Her handmaids filled the tub with tepid water that stank of sulfur, sweetening it with jars of bitter oil and handfuls of crushed mint leaves. While the bath was being prepared, Dany knelt awkwardly beside her lord husband, her belly great with their child within. She undid his braid with anxious fingers, as she had on the night he’d taken her for the first time, beneath the stars. His bells she laid aside carefully, one by one. He would want them again when he was well, she told herself.
“柯索一定能找到她，”伊丽说。
A breath of air entered the tent as Aggo poked his head through the silk. “Khaleesi,” he said, “the Andal is come, and begs leave to enter.”
女仆们将澡盆灌满散发着硫磺气息的温水，加入几罐苦油和几把捣碎的薄荷叶。在她们准备洗澡水时，身怀六甲的丹妮笨拙地跪在夫君身边，用不安的手指解开他的发辫，一如他在星空下与她初次结合的那个晚上。她小心翼翼地把他的铃铛一个个放好，她告诉自己，等他康复，他需要重新系上这些铃铛。
“The Andal” was what the Dothraki called Ser Jorah. “Yes,” she said, rising clumsily, “send him in.” She trusted the knight. He would know what to do if anyone did.
一股空气吹进帐篷，原来是阿戈从丝幕间探头。“卡丽熙，”他说，“安达尔人来了，他请求进来。”
Ser Jorah Mormont ducked through the door flap and waited a moment for his eyes to adjust to the dimness. In the fierce heat of the south, he wore loose trousers of mottled sandsilk and open-toed riding sandals that laced up to his knee. His scabbard hung from a twisted horsehair belt. Under a bleached white vest, he was bare-chested, skin reddened by the sun. “Talk goes from mouth to ear, all over the khalasar,” he said. “It is said Khal Drogo fell from his horse.”
“安达尔人”是多斯拉克人对乔拉爵士的称呼。“好的，”她笨拙地起身，“让他进来。”她信任这位骑士，假如还有人知道现在该怎么做，那此人非他莫属。
“Help him,” Dany pleaded. “For the love you say you bear me, help him now.”
乔拉·莫尔蒙爵士低头穿过帐门，等了一会儿，使眼睛适应黑暗。在南方的炎热气候下，他穿了宽松的斑纹沙丝长裤，绑到膝盖、露出脚趾的骑马凉鞋，佩剑则挂在一条曲折的马鬃带上。在漂白的背心下，他赤裸胸膛，皮肤因日晒而通红。“到处都是谣言，整个卡拉萨都传遍了。”他说，“据说卓戈卡奥从自己的马上摔下来。”
The knight knelt beside her. He looked at Drogo long and hard, and then at Dany. “Send your maids away.”
“帮帮他吧，”丹妮哀求。“看在你承诺过对我的爱份上，帮帮他罢。”
Wordlessly, her throat tight with fear, Dany made a gesture. Irri herded the other girls from the tent.
骑士在她身边跪下，意味深长地审视卓戈良久，最后对丹妮说：“把您的女仆支开。”
When they were alone, Ser Jorah drew his dagger. Deftly, with a delicacy surprising in such a big man, he began to scrape away the black leaves and dried blue mud from Drogo’s chest. The plaster had caked hard as the mud walls of the Lamb Men, and like those walls it cracked easily. Ser Jorah broke the dry mud with his knife, pried the chunks from the flesh, peeled off the leaves one by one. A foul, sweet smell rose from the wound, so thick it almost choked her. The leaves were crusted with blood and pus, Drogo’s breast black and glistening with corruption.
丹妮的喉咙因恐惧而紧绷，她一言不发地打了个手势，伊丽便哄着其他人出了帐篷。
“No,” Dany whispered as tears ran down her cheeks. “No, please, gods hear me, no.”
她们离去后，乔拉爵士抽出匕首，熟练地割开卓戈胸膛上的黑叶和干蓝泥，动作之轻巧，难以想像竟是出自如此一位大汉之手。敷料早已干如羊人的泥墙，也像泥墙一样轻易破裂。乔拉爵士用匕首切开于泥，撬掉血肉上的碎块，剥下一片片叶子。一股恶臭甜腻的味道从伤口涌出，浓烈得让她不能呼吸。满地落叶结满了血块和脓疮，卓戈的胸膛一片漆黑，腐烂的伤口闪闪发亮。
Khal Drogo thrashed, fighting some unseen enemy. Black blood ran slow and thick from his open wound.
“不，”丹妮小声说，泪水滚下双颊。“不，求求你，诸神救救我，不要。”
“Your khal is good as dead, Princess.”
卓戈卡奥抽搐了一下，好似在与某个看不见的敌人拼斗。黑色的脓血自他伤口缓缓地流下。
“No, he can’t die, he mustn’t , it was only a cut.” Dany took his large callused hand in her own small ones, and held it tight between them. “I will not let him die …”
“公主殿下，您的卡奥与死人无异。”
Ser Jorah gave a bitter laugh. “Khaleesi or queen, that command is beyond your power. Save your tears, child. Weep for him tomorrow, or a year from now. We do not have time for grief. We must go, and quickly, before he dies.”
“不，他不能死，他不可以死，这只是个小伤，”丹妮伸出细小的双手，紧紧握住卓戈长满老茧的巨掌。“我不会让他死……”
Dany was lost. “Go? Where should we go?”
乔拉爵士苦涩地笑笑。“无论你是卡丽熙还是公主，只怕这个命令都超出了你的能力所及。孩子，请留住你的泪水，明天、或是明年再为他哀悼，眼下我们无暇悲伤。趁他还没断气，我们得赶紧走。”
“Asshai, I would say. It lies far to the south, at the end of the known world, yet men say it is a great port. We will find a ship to take us back to Pentos. It will be a hard journey, make no mistake. Do you trust your khas? Will they come with us?”
丹妮不知所措。“走？去哪里？”
“Khal Drogo commanded them to keep me safe,” Dany replied uncertainly, “but if he dies …” She touched the swell of her belly. “I don’t understand. Why should we flee? I am khaleesi . I carry Drogo’s heir. He will be khal after Drogo …”
“我提议去亚夏。此地位于极远的南方，是所知世界的尽头，据说也是个繁盛的大港。在那里，我们应当能搭船回潘托斯，但毫无疑问，这将是一趟极为艰苦的旅程。你能信任你的卡斯部众吗？他们会不会跟我们走？”
Ser Jorah frowned. “Princess, hear me. The Dothraki will not follow a suckling babe. Drogo’s strength was what they bowed to, and only that. When he is gone, Jhaqo and Pono and the other kos will fight for his place, and this khalasar will devour itself. The winner will want no more rivals. The boy will be taken from your breast the moment he is born. They will give him to the dogs …”
“卓戈卡奥命令他们保护我的安全，”丹妮有些犹疑地回答：“假如他死了……”她摸摸自己隆起的小腹。“我不懂，我们为什么要逃走？我是卡丽熙，肚里怀着卓戈的后代，卓戈死后他会继任卡奥……”
Dany hugged herself. “But why?” she cried plaintively. “Why should they kill a little baby?”
乔拉爵士皱起眉头。“公主殿下，请听我说。多斯拉克人绝不会追随嗷嗷待哺的婴儿，他们臣服于卓戈的威势，但仅止于此。卓戈死后，贾科、波诺及其他‘寇’便会争夺他的地位，整个卡拉萨将自相残杀，而最后的胜者一定不会留下对手的活口。你的孩子刚一出生就会被夺走，被他们拿去喂狗……”
“He is Drogo’s son, and the crones say he will be the stallion who mounts the world. It was prophesied. Better to kill the child than to risk his fury when he grows to manhood.”
丹妮的双手紧紧抱住胸口。“可这是为什么？”她哀怨地哭道，“为什么他们要杀一个小婴儿？”
The child kicked inside her, as if he had heard. Dany remembered the story Viserys had told her, of what the Usurper’s dogs had done to Rhaegar’s children. His son had been a babe as well, yet they had ripped him from his mother’s breast and dashed his head against a wall. That was the way of men. “They must not hurt my son!” she cried. “I will order my khas to keep him safe, and Drogo’s bloodriders will—”
“因为他是卓戈的儿子，况且老妪们宣布他将成为骑着世界的骏马，他的成就已被预言。与其冒让他长大成人后回来复仇的风险，不如趁他年纪还小时杀了他。”
Ser Jorah held her by the shoulders. “A bloodrider dies with his khal . You know that, child. They will take you to Vaes Dothrak, to the crones, that is the last duty they owe him in life … when it is done, they will join Drogo in the night lands.”
此话仿佛给胎儿听到，他在她肚子里应声踢打起来。丹妮想起韦赛里斯说过的故事，篡夺者的走狗是如何啃食雷加的孩儿。大哥的儿子当年也只是个襁褓里的婴儿，但他们依旧将他从母亲的怀抱里硬生生夺走，一头撞死在墙上。这就是男人。“他们绝不能伤害我儿子！”她叫道，“我将命令我的卡斯部众保护他的安全，卓戈的血盟卫也会——”
Dany did not want to go back to Vaes Dothrak and live the rest of her life among those terrible old women, yet she knew that the knight spoke the truth. Drogo had been more than her sun-and-stars; he had been the shield that kept her safe. “I will not leave him,” she said stubbornly, miserably. She took his hand again. “I will not.”
乔拉爵士搂住她的肩膀。“孩子，血盟卫会陪卡奥殉死，这你是知道的。他们会带你去维斯·多斯拉克，将你交付给老妪，那是他们在世间对他所付的最后职责……在那之后，他们便会追随卓戈进入夜晚的国度。”
A stirring at the tent flap made Dany turn her head. Mirri Maz Duur entered, bowing low. Days on the march, trailing behind the khalasar , had left her limping and haggard, with blistered and bleeding feet and hollows under her eyes. Behind her came Qotho and Haggo, carrying the godswife’s chest between them. When the bloodriders caught sight of Drogo’s wound, the chest slipped from Haggo’s fingers and crashed to the floor of the tent, and Qotho swore an oath so foul it seared the air.
丹妮不愿意返回维斯·多斯拉克，去和那群恐怖的老妇共度余生，但她知道骑士说的是实话。卓戈不仅是她的日和星，更是保护她的免遭危难的屏障。“我不能离开他，”她固执而悲苦地说，再度执起他的手。“我绝不能。”
Mirri Maz Duur studied Drogo, her face still and dead. “The wound has festered.”
帷幕掀动，丹妮回身，只见弥丽·马兹·笃尔进来，深深低头。由于连日跟在卡拉萨后长途跋涉，她跛了脚，形容憔悴，双腿皮破血流，眼窝凹陷。柯索和哈戈跟在她后面，提着女祭司的药箱。血盟卫们一见到卓戈的伤势，哈戈手指一松，药箱滑落在地，匡地一声巨响。柯索则骂了一句非常难听的话，语气之凶恶，仿佛能燃烧空气。
“This is your work, maegi,” Qotho said. Haggo laid his fist across Mirri’s cheek with a meaty smack that drove her to the ground. Then he kicked her where she lay.
弥丽·马兹·笃尔脸如死灰地盯着卓戈。“伤口化脓了。”
“Stop it!” Dany screamed.
“巫魔女，都是你干的好事！”柯索说。哈戈一拳挥去，正中弥丽脸颊，轰地一声将她打倒在地，接着又扬腿踢她。
Qotho pulled Haggo away, saying, “Kicks are too merciful for a maegi . Take her outside. We will stake her to the earth, to be the mount of every passing man. And when they are done with her, the dogs will use her as well. Weasels will tear out her entrails and carrion crows feast upon her eyes. The flies off the river shall lay their eggs in her womb and drink pus from the ruins of her breasts …” He dug iron-hard fingers into the soft, wobbly flesh under the godswife’s arm and hauled her to her feet.
“住手！”丹妮尖叫。
“No,” Dany said. “I will not have her harmed.”
柯索拉开哈戈，并对他说：“不要踢她，这对巫魔女太仁慈了，把她拖到外面去，钉在地上，让每个经过的男人都骑上一回，结束之后，再让狗来骑她。让黄鼠狼扯出她的内脏，让乌鸦啄食她的眼睛，河边的苍蝇将在她的子宫里产卵，吸食她乳房溃烂的脓汁……”他伸出铁一般刚硬的手指，抠进女祭司臂膀松软的肌肉，一把将她拉起来。
Qotho’s lips skinned back from his crooked brown teeth in a terrible mockery of a smile. “No? You say me no? Better you should pray that we do not stake you out beside your maegi . You did this, as much as the other.”
“住手！”丹妮说，“我不许你伤害她。”
Ser Jorah stepped between them, loosening his longsword in its scabbard. “Rein in your tongue, bloodrider. The princess is still your khaleesi.”
柯索的嘴皮自他弯曲的黄板牙往上一翻，露出恐怖的嘲笑，“住手？你叫我住手？你最好祈祷我们不要把你钉在这个巫魔女旁边，今天发生这种事，你要负一半责任。”
“Only while the blood-of-my-blood still lives,” Qotho told the knight. “When he dies, she is nothing.”
乔拉爵士隔在他们之间，作势欲拔长剑。“血盟卫，你讲话小心一点，公主殿下她仍然是你的卡丽熙。”
Dany felt a tightness inside her. “Before I was khaleesi , I was the blood of the dragon. Ser Jorah, summon my khas.”
“除非吾血之血还能活下去，”柯索对骑士说，“在他死后，她就什么也不是了。”
“No,” said Qotho. “We will go. For now … Khaleesi.” Haggo followed him from the tent, scowling.
丹妮只觉浑身一凛。“我不仅是卡丽熙，更是真龙传人。乔拉爵士，立刻召集我的卡斯部众。”
“That one means you no good, Princess,” Mormont said. “The Dothraki say a man and his bloodriders share one life, and Qotho sees it ending. A dead man is beyond fear.”
“哼，”柯索道，“我们走，先不跟你计较……卡丽熙。”哈戈跟随他走出帐篷，双眉深锁。
“No one has died,” Dany said. “Ser Jorah, I may have need of your blade. Best go don your armor.” She was more frightened than she dared admit, even to herself.
“公主殿下，那人恐怕会对您不利。”莫尔蒙道，“按多斯拉克习俗，卡奥与他的血盟卫同生共死，柯索眼看自己寿命将近，才会这样放肆。死人是什么都不怕的。”
The knight bowed. “As you say.” He strode from the tent.
“什么人都没死哪，”丹妮说，“乔拉爵士，我需要借重你的剑术，请你去穿上盔甲。”她不敢承认自己有多害怕，即便在自己心里。
Dany turned back to Mirri Maz Duur. The woman’s eyes were wary. “So you have saved me once more.”
骑士一躬到底，“如您所愿。”他大步走出营帐。
“And now you must save him,” Dany said. “Please …”
丹妮转身面向弥丽·马兹·笃尔。妇人的眼神非常虚弱，“看来，您又救了我一命。”
“You do not ask a slave,” Mirri replied sharply, “you tell her.” She went to Drogo burning on his mat, and gazed long at his wound. “Ask or tell, it makes no matter. He is beyond a healer’s skills.” The khal’s eyes were closed. She opened one with her fingers. “He has been dulling the hurt with milk of the poppy.”
“换你救他一命了，”丹妮说，“求求你……”
“Yes,” Dany admitted.
“跟奴隶说话不是用问的，”弥丽尖刻地回答，“你只要交代下去，让她照办就成了。”她走到浑身发烫的卓戈席边，凝视他的伤口良久。“但眼下，无论你询问还是交代，结果都没有差别，已经没有任何医者可以救他。”卡奥双眼紧闭，她伸手拉开一边眼皮。“他是不是一直喝罂粟花奶麻痹痛觉？”
“I made him a poultice of firepod and sting-me-not and bound it in a lambskin.”
“是。”丹妮承认。
“It burned, he said. He tore it off. The herbwomen made him a new one, wet and soothing.”
“我曾用火豆和勿螫我草为他调制药膏，并用羊皮绑上。”
“It burned, yes. There is great healing magic in fire, even your hairless men know that.”
“他说那灼热得厉害，所以把羊皮撕了。草药妇人帮他弄了一帖新的，湿湿的很舒服。”
“Make him another poultice,” Dany begged. “This time I will make certain he wears it.”
“的确很灼热，但火具有强大的疗效，就连你们的无毛人都知道。”
“The time for that is past, my lady,” Mirri said. “All I can do now is ease the dark road before him, so he might ride painless to the night lands. He will be gone by morning.”
“帮他再弄帖敷药罢，”丹妮哀求，“这次我保证让他戴好。”
Her words were a knife through Dany’s breast. What had she ever done to make the gods so cruel? She had finally found a safe place, had finally tasted love and hope. She was finally going home. And now to lose it all … “No,” she pleaded. “Save him, and I will free you, I swear it. You must know a way … some magic, some …”
“夫人，来不及了，”弥丽说，“如今我能做的，只是为他指引黑暗的道路，让他毫无痛苦地骑马进入夜晚的国度。明日清晨，他就会离去。”
Mirri Maz Duur sat back on her heels and studied Daenerys through eyes as black as night. “There is a spell.” Her voice was quiet, scarcely more than a whisper. “But it is hard, lady, and dark. Some would say that death is cleaner. I learned the way in Asshai, and paid dear for the lesson. My teacher was a bloodmage from the Shadow Lands.”
她的这番话有如利刃刺进丹妮胸膛，她究竟造了什么孽，竟得到天上诸神如此残酷的对待？好不容易找到栖身之所，好不容易尝到爱情与希望的甜美，好不容易踏上归乡之路，到头来一切都是幻梦……“不，”她恳求，“只要你救他，我就放你自由，我对天发誓。你一定还知道其他的办法……某种魔法，或者……”
Dany went cold all over. “Then you truly are a maegi …”
弥丽·马兹·笃尔跪坐下来，用那双漆黑如夜的眼睛打量着丹妮。“的确还有一种魔法。”她的声音静得出奇，几与呓语无异。“但是，夫人，这个法术不但施行困难，而且非常黑暗，对某些人而言，死亡反而比较干脆。我在亚夏学会了这个法术，并为此付出惨痛的代价。我的导师是来自阴影之地的血巫。”
“Am I?” Mirri Maz Duur smiled. “Only a maegi can save your rider now, Silver Lady.”
丹妮只觉全身冰冷。“你真的是巫魔女……”
“Is there no other way?”
“是吗？”弥丽·马兹·笃尔微笑，“银夫人，眼下也只有巫魔女可以救您的勇士。”
“No other.”
“没有别的办法？”
Khal Drogo gave a shuddering gasp.
“没有。”
“Do it,” Dany blurted. She must not be afraid; she was the blood of the dragon. “Save him.”
卓戈卡奥颤抖着喘了口气。
“There is a price,” the godswife warned her.
“动手吧，”丹妮脱口而出。她不能害怕，她是真龙传人。“快救救他。”
“You’ll have gold, horses, whatever you like.”
“您必须付出代价。”女祭司警告她。
“It is not a matter of gold or horses. This is bloodmagic, lady. Only death may pay for life.”
“黄金、马匹……你要什么都可以。”
“Death?” Dany wrapped her arms around herself protectively, rocked back and forth on her heels. “My death?” She told herself she would die for him, if she must. She was the blood of the dragon, she would not be afraid. Her brother Rhaegar had died for the woman he loved.
“这不是黄金或马匹的问题，夫人，这是血魔法，惟有死亡方能换取生命。”
“No,” Mirri Maz Duur promised. “Not your death, Khaleesi.”
“死亡？”丹妮防卫性地双手抱胸，前后摇晃。“我的死？”她告诉自己，如果情非得已，她愿意为他牺牲性命。她是真龙传人，她不怕，她大哥雷加不就为他深爱的女人而献身了么？
Dany trembled with relief. “Do it.”
“不，”弥丽·马兹·笃尔向她保证。“不是您的死，卡丽熙。”
The maegi nodded solemnly. “As you speak, so it shall be done. Call your servants.”
丹妮如释重负地颤抖开来。“那就动手吧。”
Khal Drogo writhed feebly as Rakharo and Quaro lowered him into the bath. “No,” he muttered, “no. Must ride.” Once in the water, all the strength seemed to leak out of him.
巫魔女神情肃穆地点点头。“如您所愿，我将完成这个仪式。先请您的仆人进来。”
“Bring his horse,” Mirri Maz Duur commanded, and so it was done. Jhogo led the great red stallion into the tent. When the animal caught the scent of death, he screamed and reared, rolling his eyes. It took three men to subdue him.
当拉卡洛和魁洛把卓戈卡奥放进浴缸时，他虚弱地动了动。“不，”他喃喃道，“不，必须骑马。”但等他一进到水里，力量便仿佛尽数泄出。
“What do you mean to do?” Dany asked her.
“把他的马带进来。”弥丽·马兹·笃尔下达指令，他们随即照办。乔戈将那匹雄壮的红骏马牵进帐篷，它一闻到死亡的气息，立即翻开白眼，扬起前脚，嘶鸣不休，合三人之力才将它制服。
“We need the blood,” Mirri answered. “That is the way.”
“你打算怎么做？”丹妮问她。
Jhogo edged back, his hand on his arakh . He was a youth of sixteen years, whip-thin, fearless, quick to laugh, with the faint shadow of his first mustachio on his upper lip. He fell to his knees before her. “Khaleesi,” he pleaded, “you must not do this thing. Let me kill this maegi.”
“我们需要鲜血，”弥丽回答，“这，就是血的来源。”
“Kill her and you kill your khal,” Dany said.
乔戈霍地退后，伸手按住亚拉克弯刀。他是个年方十六的青年，瘦得像根鞭子，沙场上无所畏惧，平时则笑口常开，上唇已开始留出长须。他在她面前跪下。“卡丽熙，”他恳求，“这事做不得，请让我杀了这巫魔女。”
“This is bloodmagic,” he said. “It is forbidden.”
“杀了她，你就是杀了卡奥。”丹妮说。
“I am khaleesi , and I say it is not forbidden. In Vaes Dothrak, Khal Drogo slew a stallion and I ate his heart, to give our son strength and courage. This is the same. The same.”
“可这是血魔法啊。”他说，“这是禁忌。”
The stallion kicked and reared as Rakharo, Quaro, and Aggo pulled him close to the tub where the khal floated like one already dead, pus and blood seeping from his wound to stain the bathwaters. Mirri Maz Duur chanted words in a tongue that Dany did not know, and a knife appeared in her hand. Dany never saw where it came from. It looked old; hammered red bronze, leaf-shaped, its blade covered with ancient glyphs. The maegi drew it across the stallion’s throat, under the noble head, and the horse screamed and shuddered as the blood poured out of him in a red rush. He would have collapsed, but the men of her khas held him up. “Strength of the mount, go into the rider,” Mirri sang as horse blood swirled into the waters of Drogo’s bath. “Strength of the beast, go into the man.”
“我是卡丽熙，我说不是禁忌就不是禁忌。在维斯·多斯拉克，卓戈卡奥不也杀了一匹骏马，让我吃下它的心脏，好让我们的儿子拥有勇气和力量。现在这个仪式也一样，完全一样。”
Jhogo looked terrified as he struggled with the stallion’s weight, afraid to touch the dead flesh, yet afraid to let go as well. Only a horse , Dany thought. If she could buy Drogo’s life with the death of a horse, she would pay a thousand times over.
于是，拉卡洛、魁洛和阿戈三人把又跳又踢的骏马拉到浴缸旁，卡奥漂浮在水里，黑血和脓汁不断流出，仿佛已经死去。弥丽·马兹·笃尔开始用一种丹妮从没听过的语言喃喃念诵，手中陡然出现一把小刀。丹妮没看清刀是从哪里来的。这把刀看起来相当陈旧，红铜铸成，树叶形状，锋刃刻满古老符咒。巫魔女举刀划过骏马颈项，割开它高贵的头颅，马儿惨叫一声，猛烈颤抖，鲜血有如一股红泉，自伤口喷出。若非她的卡斯部众死命扶住，它早已四脚一软，瘫倒在地。“坐骑之力，传予骑者。”马血涌进水中，弥丽跟着高唱，“野兽之力，传予人类。”
When they let the stallion fall, the bath was a dark red, and nothing showed of Drogo but his face. Mirri Maz Duur had no use for the carcass. “Burn it,” Dany told them. It was what they did, she knew. When a man died, his mount was killed and placed beneath him on the funeral pyre, to carry him to the night lands. The men of her khas dragged the carcass from the tent. The blood had gone everywhere. Even the sandsilk walls were spotted with red, and the rugs underfoot were black and wet.
乔戈挣扎着，竭力支撑沉重的骏马，脸上写满了惊恐，他害怕碰触死去的肉体，却更害怕放手。不过是匹马，丹妮想，假如一匹马的死，就能换取卓戈的性命，那要她付出一千次这样的代价都没关系。
Braziers were lit. Mirri Maz Duur tossed a red powder onto the coals. It gave the smoke a spicy scent, a pleasant enough smell, yet Eroeh fled sobbing, and Dany was filled with fear. But she had gone too far to turn back now. She sent her handmaids away. “Go with them, Silver Lady,” Mirri Maz Duur told her.
待得他们任马瘫倒，澡盆里已一片暗红，卓戈全身上下只有脸孔露在血水外。弥丽·马兹·笃尔不需要尸体，所以丹妮对他们说：“烧了它。”她知道这是多斯拉克人的习俗：每当有人死去，他的坐骑也会被杀，放在他的火葬柴堆下，与他一同焚烧，好载他进入夜晚的国度。她的卡斯部众遵令将马尸拖出帐篷，四处都是鲜红，连沙丝帐幕上也血迹斑斑，地毯更是被黑血彻底浸湿。
“I will stay,” Dany said. “The man took me under the stars and gave life to the child inside me. I will not leave him.”
女仆燃起火盆，弥丽·马兹·笃尔在煤上洒了一种红粉末，顷刻间，冒出的烟便有了辛辣香气，虽然并不难闻，却令埃萝叶哭着逃了出去，丹妮自己也心生恐惧，然而走到这步田地，她已经无法回头，于是她把女仆全部遣开。“银夫人，您也得跟她们出去。”弥丽·马兹·笃尔告诉她。
“You must. Once I begin to sing, no one must enter this tent. My song will wake powers old and dark. The dead will dance here this night. No living man must look on them.”
“不，我要留下来，”丹妮说，“这个男人在星空之下与我结合，给了我体内胎儿的生命，我不要离开他。”
Dany bowed her head, helpless. “No one will enter.” She bent over the tub, over Drogo in his bath of blood, and kissed him lightly on the brow. “Bring him back to me,” she whispered to Mirri Maz Duur before she fled.
“你一定要离开。一旦我开始吟唱，任何人都不能进入这座帐篷。我的咒语将唤醒古老而黑暗的力量，今晚亡灵将在此舞蹈，活人不能看到他们。”
Outside, the sun was low on the horizon, the sky a bruised red. The khalasar had made camp. Tents and sleeping mats were scattered as far as the eye could see. A hot wind blew. Jhogo and Aggo were digging a firepit to burn the dead stallion. A crowd had gathered to stare at Dany with hard black eyes, their faces like masks of beaten copper. She saw Ser Jorah Mormont, wearing mail and leather now, sweat beading on his broad, balding forehead. He pushed his way through the Dothraki to Dany’s side. When he saw the scarlet footprints her boots had left on the ground, the color seemed to drain from his face. “What have you done, you little fool?” he asked hoarsely.
丹妮无助地低下头。“任何人都不能进入，”她走到澡盆边，弯下身子，看着浸在鲜血里的卓戈，轻轻吻了他的额头。“请为我把他带回来。”逃离帐篷前，她悄声对弥丽·马兹·笃尔说。
“I had to save him.”
帐篷外，夕阳低垂，天空是一片瘀伤的红。卡拉萨已在此扎营，举目所及，尽是帐篷和睡席。热风吹起，乔戈和阿戈正在挖掘焚烧马尸的坑洞。营帐前聚集了一群人，用严厉的黑眼睛瞪着丹妮，他们的脸则活像磨亮赤铜做成的面具。她看见了乔拉·莫尔蒙爵士，他已经穿起锁甲和皮衣，日渐光秃的宽额上布满豆大的汗珠。他推开多斯拉克人群，走到丹妮身边，当他看见她的鞋子在地上留下的猩红足印时，顿时脸色苍白。“你这小笨蛋，你到底做了什么？”他嘶哑地问。
“We could have fled,” he said. “I would have seen you safe to Asshai, Princess. There was no need …”
“我非救他不可。”
“Am I truly your princess?” she asked him.
“我们本来可以逃走，”他说，“公主殿下，我本来可以护送你安全抵达亚夏，实在没必要……”
“You know you are, gods save us both.”
“我真的是你的公主？”她问他。
“Then help me now.”
“你很清楚你是。啊，诸神救救我们俩。”
Ser Jorah grimaced. “Would that I knew how.”
“帮帮我。”
Mirri Maz Duur’s voice rose to a high, ululating wail that sent a shiver down Dany’s back. Some of the Dothraki began to mutter and back away. The tent was aglow with the light of braziers within. Through the blood-spattered sandsilk, she glimpsed shadows moving.
乔拉爵士皱眉：“我知道怎么帮就好了。”
Mirri Maz Duur was dancing, and not alone.
弥丽·马兹·笃尔的声音转为高亢尖细的嚎啕，令丹妮背脊发麻，有些多斯拉克人念念有词地向后退去，火盆的光将营帐照得通明，透过血迹斑斑的沙丝帷幕，她瞥见帐内有无数影子在晃动。
Dany saw naked fear on the faces of the Dothraki. “This must not be,” Qotho thundered.
弥丽·马兹·笃尔正在跳舞，但并非独自一人。
She had not seen the bloodrider return. Haggo and Cohollo were with him. They had brought the hairless men, the eunuchs who healed with knife and needle and fire.
恐惧赤裸裸地呈现在多斯拉克人脸上。“这事不能继续。”柯索大喝。
“This will be,” Dany replied.
她没注意血盟卫回来，哈戈和科霍罗也跟他一道，带着“无毛人”，亦即用尖刀、针线和火焰为人治病疗伤的太监。
“Maegi,” Haggo growled. And old Cohollo—Cohollo who had bound his life to Drogo’s on the day of his birth, Cohollo who had always been kind to her—Cohollo spat full in her face.
“这事必须继续。”丹妮回答。
“You will die, maegi,” Qotho promised, “but the other must die first.” He drew his arakh and made for the tent.
“你这巫魔女！”哈戈咆哮。接着，老科霍罗——就是那个早在卓戈诞生之日，便将自己的性命与之紧紧结合的科霍罗，那个向来待她温和的科霍罗——朝她面门吐了口水。
“No,” she shouted, “you mustn’t.” She caught him by the shoulder, but Qotho shoved her aside. Dany fell to her knees, crossing her arms over her belly to protect the child within. “Stop him,” she commanded her khas , “kill him.”
“巫魔女，你等死罢，”柯索向她保证，“但先杀另一个。”他抽出亚拉克弯刀，朝帐篷走去。
Rakharo and Quaro stood beside the tent flap. Quaro took a step forward, reaching for the handle of his whip, but Qotho spun graceful as a dancer, the curved arakh rising. It caught Quaro low under the arm, the bright sharp steel biting up through leather and skin, through muscle and rib bone. Blood fountained as the young rider reeled backward, gasping.
“不，”她叫道，“你不能进去！”她抓住他的肩膀，却被柯索手一挥手推开。丹妮跌倒在地，连忙双手抱住腹部，保护肚里的胎儿。“阻止他！”她朝她的卡斯部众下令。“杀了他！”
Qotho wrenched the blade free. “Horselord,” Ser Jorah Mormont called. “Try me.” His longsword slid from its scabbard.
站在营帐门口的是拉卡洛和魁洛，听到命令，魁洛前跨一步，伸手欲拿皮鞭，但柯索宛如舞者般优雅地向前一跃，举起亚拉克弯刀，砍中魁洛胸膛。尖利的钢刃咬穿皮革和皮肤，直透肌肉和肋骨。年轻战士喘着气向后倒去，血如泉涌。
Qotho whirled, cursing. The arakh moved so fast that Quaro’s blood flew from it in a fine spray, like rain in a hot wind. The longsword caught it a foot from Ser Jorah’s face, and held it quivering for an instant as Qotho howled in fury. The knight was clad in chainmail, with gauntlets and greaves of lobstered steel and a heavy gorget around his throat, but he had not thought to don his helm.
柯索抽出弯刀。“马王，”乔拉·莫尔蒙爵士叫道，“来跟我试试！”他的长剑铿地一声，滑出剑鞘。
Qotho danced backward, arakh whirling around his head in a shining blur, flickering out like lightning as the knight came on in a rush. Ser Jorah parried as best he could, but the slashes came so fast that it seemed to Dany that Qotho had four arakhs and as many arms. She heard the crunch of sword on mail, saw sparks fly as the long curved blade glanced off a gauntlet. Suddenly it was Mormont stumbling backward, and Qotho leaping to the attack. The left side of the knight’s face ran red with blood, and a cut to the hip opened a gash in his mail and left him limping. Qotho screamed taunts at him, calling him a craven, a milk man, a eunuch in an iron suit. “You die now!” he promised, arakh shivering through the red twilight. Inside Dany’s womb, her son kicked wildly. The curved blade slipped past the straight one and bit deep into the knight’s hip where the mail gaped open.
柯索咒骂旋身，手中的亚拉克弯刀飞也似地朝对方砍去，速度之快，刀上魁洛的血有如热风中的雨，溅洒开来。乔拉爵士的长剑在离他脸庞只有一尺的地方挡住这记攻势，刀剑僵持了片刻，力道千钧，锋刃颤抖，柯索愤怒地大声嚎叫。骑士穿着锁甲，戴着铁手套和龙虾护膝，还有厚重的护喉，但他没戴头盔。
Mormont grunted, stumbled. Dany felt a sharp pain in her belly, a wetness on her thighs. Qotho shrieked triumph, but his arakh had found bone, and for half a heartbeat it caught.
柯索向后一跃，骑士随即突前反攻，但柯索舞动亚拉克弯刀，在头部绽开一片亮如闪电的白芒。在丹妮眼中，柯索仿佛生了四手四刀，乔拉爵士只能勉强抵挡。她听见弯刀砍在锁甲上的响声，看到弯刀划过铁手套时激进的火花，几回合后形势逆转，莫尔蒙踉跄后退，柯索则跳近攻击。骑士的左脸血红一片，一记划破他臀部盔甲的刀伤使他行动艰难。柯索厉声嘲弄，辱骂对手是懦夫、是奶人、是穿着铁衣服的太监。“你去死！”他咒道，舞跃的亚拉克弯刀划破血红暮色。丹妮的儿子在子宫里疯狂地踢打。这时，弯刀滑过笔直的长剑，再度深咬进骑士臀部盔甲的裂口。
It was enough. Ser Jorah brought his longsword down with all the strength left him, through flesh and muscle and bone, and Qotho’s forearm dangled loose, flopping on a thin cord of skin and sinew. The knight’s next cut was at the Dothraki’s ear, so savage that Qotho’s face seemed almost to explode.
莫尔蒙闷哼一声，绊了一跤。丹妮只觉腹部传来一阵剧痛，两腿间有湿漉漉的感觉。柯索尖声狂叫庆祝胜利，但他的亚拉克弯刀砍到了骨头，卡住了半个心跳的时间。
The Dothraki were shouting, Mirri Maz Duur wailing inside the tent like nothing human, Quaro pleading for water as he died. Dany cried out for help, but no one heard. Rakharo was fighting Haggo, arakh dancing with arakh until Jhogo’s whip cracked, loud as thunder, the lash coiling around Haggo’s throat. A yank, and the bloodrider stumbled backward, losing his feet and his sword. Rakharo sprang forward, howling, swinging his arakh down with both hands through the top of Haggo’s head. The point caught between his eyes, red and quivering. Someone threw a stone, and when Dany looked, her shoulder was torn and bloody. “No,” she wept, “no, please, stop it, it’s too high, the price is too high.” More stones came flying. She tried to crawl toward the tent, but Cohollo caught her. Fingers in her hair, he pulled her head back and she felt the cold touch of his knife at her throat. “My baby,” she screamed, and perhaps the gods heard, for as quick as that, Cohollo was dead. Aggo’s arrow took him under the arm, to pierce his lungs and heart.
这就够了。乔拉爵士用尽毕生力气挥剑砍下，穿透皮肤、肌肉和骨头，几乎把柯索的右手前臂硬生生斩断，只剩几丝皮肤和肌腱相连，松垮地摇摆。骑士再度挥剑，朝多斯拉克人耳部一刀，力道极猛，柯索的脸仿佛整个炸开。
When at last Daenerys found the strength to raise her head, she saw the crowd dispersing, the Dothraki stealing silently back to their tents and sleeping mats. Some were saddling horses and riding off. The sun had set. Fires burned throughout the khalasar , great orange blazes that crackled with fury and spit embers at the sky. She tried to rise, and agony seized her and squeezed her like a giant’s fist. The breath went out of her; it was all she could do to gasp. The sound of Mirri Maz Duur’s voice was like a funeral dirge. Inside the tent, the shadows whirled.
围观的多斯拉克人大呼小叫，帐篷里弥丽·马兹·笃尔的嚎叫完全不是人的声音。地上的魁洛哀求别人给他水喝，然后死去。丹妮则出声呼救，但无人在意。拉卡洛正与哈戈搏斗，两柄亚拉克弯刀相互交击，直到乔戈的皮鞭喀啦一响，如爆雷般缠住哈戈的喉咙。他猛力一扯，血盟卫失去重心，踉跄地向后摔倒，弯刀从手中松落。拉卡洛向前疾跃，双手紧握亚拉克弯刀，咆哮着从哈戈头顶捅下。刀尖卡在血盟卫两眼之间，鲜红而颤抖。有人朝丹妮丢石头，她定神一看，自己的肩膀已经皮破流血。“住手，”她哭喊，“住手，求求你们，快住手，太高了，这样的代价太高了。”更多石块朝她飞来，她试图往帐篷爬去，却被科霍罗一把攫住头发，向后拉扯，冰冷的刀锋架上她的喉咙。“我的宝宝！”她尖叫，或许天上诸神真的听见了，因为她莆一出声，科霍罗便倒地身亡。阿戈的箭正中他胸膛，射穿肺部和心脏。
An arm went under her waist, and then Ser Jorah was lifting her off her feet. His face was sticky with blood, and Dany saw that half his ear was gone. She convulsed in his arms as the pain took her again, and heard the knight shouting for her handmaids to help him. Are they all so afraid? She knew the answer. Another pain grasped her, and Dany bit back a scream. It felt as if her son had a knife in each hand, as if he were hacking at her to cut his way out. “Doreah, curse you,” Ser Jorah roared. “Come here. Fetch the birthing women.”
等丹妮莉丝终于找回力气抬头，群众已经渐渐散去，原本围观的多斯拉克人蹑手蹑脚地返回自己的营帐和睡席。有的直接装上马鞍骑马离去。夕阳西沉，卡拉萨营地里篝火熊熊，团团橙焰发出愤怒的哔啪声，将火星吐进夜空。她试着起身，却因剧痛无法动弹，仿佛被巨人的拳头紧紧握住。她难以呼吸，只能拼命喘气。弥丽·马兹·笃尔的吟唱有如葬仪上的挽歌。帐篷内，黑影盘旋。
“They will not come. They say she is accursed.”
一只手抱住她的腰，乔拉爵士把她扶了起来。他满脸是血，丹妮发现他还少了半只耳朵。剧痛再度袭来，她在他怀里猛烈抽搐，只听见骑士大声呼唤她的女仆过来帮忙。难道她们都这么怕我吗？她已经知道了答案。又一阵剧痛袭来，丹妮咬紧嘴唇，忍住尖叫。她的儿子仿佛双手都握着尖刀，正从她体内砍出一条路来。“多莉亚，你该死，”乔拉爵士咆哮，“快过来，把接生婆找来！”
“They’ll come or I’ll have their heads.”
“她们不肯来。她们说她是被诅咒的人。”
Doreah wept. “They are gone, my lord.”
“她们要么过来，要么我就把她们的头砍了。”
“The maegi,” someone else said. Was that Aggo? “Take her to the maegi.”
多莉亚哭了出来。“大人，她们都逃了。”
No , Dany wanted to say, no, not that, you mustn’t , but when she opened her mouth, a long wail of pain escaped, and the sweat broke over her skin. What was wrong with them, couldn’t they see? Inside the tent the shapes were dancing, circling the brazier and the bloody bath, dark against the sandsilk, and some did not look human. She glimpsed the shadow of a great wolf, and another like a man wreathed in flames.
“巫魔女，”另一个人说。是阿戈吗？“带她去巫魔女那里。”
“The Lamb Woman knows the secrets of the birthing bed,” Irri said. “She said so, I heard her.”
不，丹妮想开口，不，不，你们不可以。但当她张开嘴巴，却只能吐出长长的痛苦呻吟，全身上下的皮肤不断冒汗。他们这是怎么了？难道他们看不出来？帐篷内，无数的形影正围绕火盆和血淋淋的澡缸盘旋跳舞，投射在沙丝上，显得格外阴暗，有些形体根本不是人。她瞥见一头巨狼，还有一个如在烈焰中扭动的男子。
“Yes,” Doreah agreed, “I heard her too.”
“羊女懂得染血产床的所有奥秘，”伊丽说，“她自己说的，我亲耳听见。”
No , she shouted, or perhaps she only thought it, for no whisper of sound escaped her lips. She was being carried. Her eyes opened to gaze up at a flat dead sky, black and bleak and starless. Please, no . The sound of Mirri Maz Duur’s voice grew louder, until it filled the world. The shapes! she screamed. The dancers!
“是的，”多莉亚也同意，“我也听见了。”
Ser Jorah carried her inside the tent.
不，她高声尖叫，莫非这只是她脑中的想法？因为她的双唇没有发出任何声音。有人把她抬起来，她睁开眼睛，凝望着上方平板死寂的天空，漆黑而凄凉，无星之夜。不，求求你们！弥丽·马兹·笃尔的吟唱越变越大，淹没了整个世界。那些可怕的形体啊！她尖叫，那些骇人的舞者啊！
*ARYA
乔拉爵士抱着她走进帐篷。
T he scent of hot bread drifting from the shops along the Street of Flour was sweeter than any perfume Arya had ever smelled. She took a deep breath and stepped closer to the pigeon. It was a plump one, speckled brown, busily pecking at a crust that had fallen between two cobblestones, but when Arya’s shadow touched it, it took to the air.
第六十六章 艾莉亚
Her stick sword whistled out and caught it two feet off the ground, and it went down in a flurry of brown feathers. She was on it in the blink of an eye, grabbing a wing as the pigeon flapped and fluttered. It pecked at her hand. She grabbed its neck and twisted until she felt the bone snap.
从面粉街沿路店铺传出的热面包气味，比艾莉亚闻过的任何一种香水都要诱人。她深吸一口气，朝鸽子又靠近一步。这是只肥鸽，身上长满褐斑，正忙着啄食地上鹅卵石缝隙间的面包屑。然而艾莉亚的影子一碰到它，它便拍翅飞起。
Compared with catching cats, pigeons were easy .
她的木剑咻地一声窜出，在离地两尺的半空中击中鸟儿，随后它便伴着一堆棕羽毛掉落地面。只一眨眼功夫，她便冲到鸽子旁边，抓住它一只翅膀。鸽子拼命振翅欲飞，还啄她的手。但她抓住它的脖子用力一扭，直到感觉骨头断裂。
A passing septon was looking at her askance. “Here’s the best place to find pigeon,” Arya told him as she brushed herself off and picked up her fallen stick sword. “They come for the crumbs.” He hurried away.
与抓猫相比，捕鸽子实在简单。
She tied the pigeon to her belt and started down the street. A man was pushing a load of tarts by on a two-wheeled cart; the smells sang of blueberries and lemons and apricots. Her stomach made a hollow rumbly noise. “Could I have one?” she heard herself say. “A lemon, or … or any kind.”
一位路过的修士疑惑地看着她。“这里是抓鸽子最好的地方，”艾莉亚一边拍拍身子，拾起掉落的木剑，一边向他解释，“因为它们会来吃面包屑。”听罢此言，他急急忙忙地离开。
The pushcart man looked her up and down. Plainly he did not like what he saw. “Three coppers.”
她把鸽子绑在皮带上，沿着街走下去。一名男子推着一辆两轮车，上面满满地放着果酱甜饼，散发出蓝莓、柠檬和杏子的香气。她的空腹咕噜作响。“可以给我一个么？”她听见自己说，“柠檬，或是……或是什么口味都好。”
Arya tapped her wooden sword against the side of her boot. “I’ll trade you a fat pigeon,” she said.
推车的男子上下打量她，显然不太喜欢眼前的光景。“三个铜板。”
“The Others take your pigeon,” the pushcart man said.
艾莉亚用木剑敲敲靴边。“我用一只肥鸽跟你换，”她说。
The tarts were still warm from the oven. The smells were making her mouth water, but she did not have three coppers … or one. She gave the pushcart man a look, remembering what Syrio had told her about seeing . He was short, with a little round belly, and when he moved he seemed to favor his left leg a little. She was just thinking that if she snatched a tart and ran he would never be able to catch her when he said, “You be keepin’ your filthy hands off. The gold cloaks know how to deal with thieving little gutter rats, that they do.”
“异鬼才要你的鸽子呢。”推车男子道。
Arya glanced warily behind her. Two of the City Watch were standing at the mouth of an alley. Their cloaks hung almost to the ground, the heavy wool dyed a rich gold; their mail and boots and gloves were black. One wore a longsword at his hip, the other an iron cudgel. With a last wistful glance at the tarts, Arya edged back from the cart and hurried off. The gold cloaks had not been paying her any special attention, but the sight of them tied her stomach in knots. Arya had been staying as far from the castle as she could get, yet even from a distance she could see the heads rotting atop the high red walls. Flocks of crows squabbled noisily over each head, thick as flies. The talk in Flea Bottom was that the gold cloaks had thrown in with the Lannisters, their commander raised to a lord, with lands on the Trident and a seat on the king’s council.
刚出炉的果酱饼热腾腾的，香味馋得她直流口水，但她没有三枚铜板……连一个都没有。她看了推车男子一眼，想起西利欧教导她“洞察真相”。他生得很矮，挺着圆圆的小腹，走路时似乎重心偏左。她正在思考假如自己抓了一块饼拔腿就跑，他应该追不上时，只听他说：“把你的脏手给我拿开。你瞧，金袍子知道怎么对付小扒手。”
She had also heard other things, scary things, things that made no sense to her. Some said her father had murdered King Robert and been slain in turn by Lord Renly. Others insisted that Renly had killed the king in a drunken quarrel between brothers. Why else should he have fled in the night like a common thief? One story said the king had been killed by a boar while hunting, another that he’d died eating a boar, stuffing himself so full that he’d ruptured at the table. No, the king had died at table, others said, but only because Varys the Spider poisoned him. No, it had been the queen who poisoned him. No, he had died of a pox. No, he had choked on a fish bone.
艾莉亚满怀戒心地往后看去。两名都城守卫站在巷口，身披金黄色的厚重羊毛披风，几乎垂到地上；他们的护甲、长靴和手套则是黑色。其中一人腰际佩了长剑，另一个则拿了根铁棍。艾莉亚依依不舍地看了果酱饼最后一眼，转身跑开。金袍卫士虽没特别注意她，可她一看到他们就浑身不对劲。这段时间以来，艾莉亚尽可能地远离城堡，然而即使离得很远，她依旧能看见高高的红墙上腐烂的人头，每颗头上都有大群乌鸦盘旋乱叫，多得像垃圾堆里的苍蝇。跳蚤窟里传言，金袍卫士和兰尼斯特家狼狈为奸，他们的指挥官因而跻身贵族之列，不仅获得了三叉戟河附近的封地，还成了国王的重臣。
One thing all the stories agreed on: King Robert was dead. The bells in the seven towers of the Great Sept of Baelor had tolled for a day and a night, the thunder of their grief rolling across the city in a bronze tide. They only rang the bells like that for the death of a king, a tanner’s boy told Arya.
她也听说了其他的事，吓人的事，把她弄糊涂了。有人说父亲谋害了劳勃国王，之后被蓝礼公爵所杀。有人坚持是两兄弟醉酒发生口角，蓝礼失手把劳勃杀掉的，否则他干嘛大半夜像个小偷似的溜走哩？一种版本的故事宣称国王出外打猎时被一头野猪所杀，另一种版本的故事又说他是吃野猪肉活活撑死。还有人说，不对，国王虽是死在餐桌上，却是因为八爪蜘蛛瓦里斯给他下了毒。不对，毒害他的是王后。不对，他是生疹子死的。不对，他是给鱼骨头噎死的。
All she wanted was to go home, but leaving King’s Landing was not so easy as she had hoped. Talk of war was on every lip, and gold cloaks were as thick on the city walls as fleas on … well, her, for one. She had been sleeping in Flea Bottom, on rooftops and in stables, wherever she could find a place to lie down, and it hadn’t taken her long to learn that the district was well named.
所有故事只有一个共通之处：劳勃国王死了。贝勒大圣堂的七座钟塔响彻日夜，哀悼的鸣动如雷般朝众人滚滚袭来。一位皮匠学徒告诉艾莉亚，只有国王驾崩时，他们才会这样敲钟。
Every day since her escape from the Red Keep, Arya had visited each of the seven city gates in turn. The Dragon Gate, the Lion Gate, and the Old Gate were closed and barred. The Mud Gate and the Gate of the Gods were open, but only to those who wanted to enter the city; the guards let no one out. Those who were allowed to leave left by the King’s Gate or the Iron Gate, but Lannister men-at-arms in crimson cloaks and lion-crested helms manned the guard posts there. Spying down from the roof of an inn by the King’s Gate, Arya saw them searching wagons and carriages, forcing riders to open their saddlebags, and questioning everyone who tried to pass on foot.
她只想回家，但离开君临远不如她想像的那么容易。每个人都在谈论战争，而城墙上的金袍卫士之多，就好像……好像她身上的跳蚤一样。这段时间，她都睡在跳蚤窝，不管屋顶、马厩，只要能躺下来的地方就行。没过多久，她发现这街区的名字取得真是恰当。
Sometimes she thought about swimming the river, but the Blackwater Rush was wide and deep, and everyone agreed that its currents were wicked and treacherous. She had no coin to pay a ferryman or take passage on a ship.
自从逃出红堡后，她每天都会到七座城门各绕一遍。巨龙门、雄狮门和旧城门都已紧紧关闭，加上门闩。烂泥门和诸神门虽然还开着，但金袍卫士把守严密，只进不出。获准离开的人走的是国王门和钢铁门，但这两道门由身穿鲜红披风，头顶雄狮头盔的兰尼斯特部队亲自守卫。艾莉亚曾趴在国王门附近的一家旅店屋顶上，眺望过去，只见他们搜索马车货物，强迫骑者打开鞍袋，详加盘查每位徒步出城的人。
Her lord father had taught her never to steal, but it was growing harder to remember why. If she did not get out soon, she would have to take her chances with the gold cloaks. She hadn’t gone hungry much since she learned to knock down birds with her stick sword, but she feared so much pigeon was making her sick. A couple she’d eaten raw, before she found Flea Bottom.
她也想过游泳渡河，但黑水河既宽且深，而每个人都知道里面的暗流汹涌莫测。要搭船，她又没钱付给船夫。
In the Bottom there were pot-shops along the alleys where huge tubs of stew had been simmering for years, and you could trade half your bird for a heel of yesterday’s bread and a “bowl o’ brown,” and they’d even stick the other half in the fire and crisp it up for you, so long as you plucked the feathers yourself. Arya would have given anything for a cup of milk and a lemon cake, but the brown wasn’t so bad. It usually had barley in it, and chunks of carrot and onion and turnip, and sometimes even apple, with a film of grease swimming on top. Mostly she tried not to think about the meat. Once she had gotten a piece of fish.
父亲大人教导她绝不能偷东西，可到底为什么不能偷，她是越来越模糊了。眼下她再不赶紧出城，迟早会被金袍子找上。虽然自从她学会用木剑打鸟，肚子就很少挨饿，但天天吃鸽子肉，她已经有些反胃。在找到跳蚤窝以前，有两次她还是生吃的。
The only thing was, the pot-shops were never empty, and even as she bolted down her food, Arya could feel them watching. Some of them stared at her boots or her cloak, and she knew what they were thinking. With others, she could almost feel their eyes crawling under her leathers; she didn’t know what they were thinking, and that scared her even more. A couple times, she was followed out into the alleys and chased, but so far no one had been able to catch her.
跳蚤窝的巷子里，有许多煮着大锅浓汤，终年冒烟的食堂。你可以用半只鸟跟他们换一点昨天的面包和一碗“褐汤”，假如你肯自己拔毛，他们还愿意帮你把另外半只鸟烤得香香脆脆。艾莉亚愿以任何代价换取一杯牛奶和一块柠檬蛋糕，但“褐汤”其实也不坏。浓汤表面浮着一层油，里面通常有大麦、胡萝卜块、洋葱和芜菁，有时还有苹果。她已经学会了不去幻想肉的味道。只有一次，她在汤里吃到一片鱼肉。
The silver bracelet she’d hoped to sell had been stolen her first night out of the castle, along with her bundle of good clothes, snatched while she slept in a burnt-out house off Pig Alley. All they left her was the cloak she had been huddled in, the leathers on her back, her wooden practice sword … and Needle. She’d been lying on top of Needle, or else it would have been gone too; it was worth more than all the rest together. Since then Arya had taken to walking around with her cloak draped over her right arm, to conceal the blade at her hip. The wooden sword she carried in her left hand, out where everybody could see it, to scare off robbers, but there were men in the pot-shops who wouldn’t have been scared off if she’d had a battle-axe. It was enough to make her lose her taste for pigeon and stale bread. Often as not, she went to bed hungry rather than risk the stares.
惟一的麻烦是，这些食堂永远挤满了人，每当艾莉亚狼吞虎咽时，总觉得他们盯着她看。他们瞪着她的靴子和斗篷，她很清楚对方在想些什么。还有些人的目光，让她感觉好像在她的皮衣下面爬，她不明白这些人在想什么，反而更加害怕。更有几次她遭人跟踪，在暗巷里没命奔逃，好在到目前为止，没人抓得到她。
Once she was outside the city, she would find berries to pick, or orchards she might raid for apples and cherries. Arya remembered seeing some from the kingsroad on the journey south. And she could dig for roots in the forest, even run down some rabbits. In the city, the only things to run down were rats and cats and scrawny dogs. The pot-shops would give you a fistful of coppers for a litter of pups, she’d heard, but she didn’t like to think about that.
她原本打算变卖换钱的银手镯，早在离开城堡的第一天晚上就被偷了。当晚她睡在猪巷一间烧毁的屋子里，手镯和那包贵重衣物就在熟睡中不翼而飞，只剩裹在身上的披风，穿着的皮衣和那把练习木剑……以及“缝衣针”。她躺在缝衣针上，否则它肯定也会被偷走，它可比其他东西加起来还要宝贵呢。从那之后，艾莉亚走路时便习惯让斗篷盖住右手，用以遮掩佩在腰际的宝剑。她把木剑拿在左手，让所有人都看得到，用以吓唬强盗——只可惜食堂里有些人，就算她拿着一柄战斧，恐怕也无所谓。看到这些人，足以让她对鸽子肉和硬面包的胃口全失。所以有时候她宁可空着肚子睡觉，也不愿冒险被这些人注意。
Down below the Street of Flour was a maze of twisting alleys and cross streets. Arya scrambled through the crowds, trying to put distance between her and the gold cloaks. She had learned to keep to the center of the street. Sometimes she had to dodge wagons and horses, but at least you could see them coming. If you walked near the buildings, people grabbed you. In some alleys you couldn’t help but brush against the walls; the buildings leaned in so close they almost met.
一旦出城，她便可采野莓吃，或找个果园偷摘苹果和樱桃。艾莉亚记得南下途中曾看到好多园子。再不济，她还可以在森林里挖草根，甚至抓兔子吃。城里会跑的动物，只有老鼠、猫和瘦狗。听说一窝小狗可以在食堂换得一把铜板，但她想想就觉得不安。
A whooping gang of small children went running past, chasing a rolling hoop. Arya stared at them with resentment, remembering the times she’d played at hoops with Bran and Jon and their baby brother Rickon. She wondered how big Rickon had grown, and whether Bran was sad. She would have given anything if Jon had been here to call her “little sister” and muss her hair. Not that it needed mussing. She’d seen her reflection in puddles, and she didn’t think hair got any more mussed than hers.
面粉街下的巷道错综复杂，有如迷宫，艾莉亚在人群里推挤，拉开和金袍卫士之间的距离。她已经学会走在道路中央，虽然免不了时时闪躲车辆和马匹，但至少可以看清来者是谁。假如你走得太靠近建筑物，很容易被人一把攫住。可惜在某些巷子里，你不得不贴墙走：建筑物之间距离太近，几乎彼此相连。
She had tried talking to the children she saw in the street, hoping to make a friend who would give her a place to sleep, but she must have talked wrong or something. The little ones only looked at her with quick, wary eyes and ran away if she came too close. Their big brothers and sisters asked questions Arya couldn’t answer, called her names, and tried to steal from her. Only yesterday, a scrawny barefoot girl twice her age had knocked her down and tried to pull the boots off her feet, but Arya gave her a crack on her ear with her stick sword that sent her off sobbing and bleeding.
一群孩童大呼小叫地跑过身边，追着一个滚动的铁环。艾莉亚怨恨地瞪着他们，想起以前和布兰、琼恩以及小瑞肯玩滚铁环的时光。她不知现在瑞肯长大了多少，也不知布兰是否伤心难过。她愿意付出任何代价，只要琼恩能在她身边，叫她“我的小妹”，弄乱她的头发。其实她的头发已经够乱了，之前她在路上的积水坑中看见自己的倒影，只觉这是全天下最脏的头发。
A gull wheeled overhead as she made her way down the hill toward Flea Bottom. Arya glanced at it thoughtfully, but it was well beyond the reach of her stick. It made her think of the sea. Maybe that was the way out. Old Nan used to tell stories of boys who stowed away on trading galleys and sailed off into all kinds of adventures. Maybe Arya could do that too. She decided to visit the riverfront. It was on the way to the Mud Gate anyway, and she hadn’t checked that one today.
她曾试着和街上的小孩说话，看能不能交个朋友，让她有地方睡。可能是她说错话了吧，年纪小的孩子只是充满戒心，飞快地瞧她一眼，如果她靠近，便立刻跑开。而他们的大哥大姐则会问些艾莉亚回答不出的问题，给她取难听的绰号，甚至偷她的东西。昨天，便有个打着赤脚，骨瘦如柴，年纪足足是她两倍的女孩把她打倒在地，企图扯下她的那双靴子。艾莉亚拿起木剑，喀地一声打中对方耳朵，令她抽抽噎噎地流着血跑走了。
The wharfs were oddly quiet when Arya got there. She spied another pair of gold cloaks, walking side by side through the fish market, but they never so much as looked at her. Half the stalls were empty, and it seemed to her that there were fewer ships at dock than she remembered. Out on the Blackwater, three of the king’s war galleys moved in formation, gold-painted hulls splitting the water as their oars rose and fell. Arya watched them for a bit, then began to make her way along the river.
她走下雷妮丝丘陵的缓坡，朝跳蚤窝走去。一只海鸥飞过头顶，艾莉亚若有所思地看着它，可它超出木剑攻击范围太远。看到海鸥，不禁让她想起海洋，说不定这正是逃走的办法。老奶妈以前常说一个故事，有位小男孩躲在商船货舱里逃走，结果遇上各式各样的精彩冒险，或许艾莉亚也行哩。于是她决定去河边看看，反正会路过烂泥门，而她今天还没去那儿呢。
When she saw the guardsmen on the third pier, in grey woolen cloaks trimmed with white satin, her heart almost stopped in her chest. The sight of Winterfell's colors brought tears to her eyes. Behind them, a sleek three-banked trading galley rocked at her moorings. Arya could not read the name painted on the hull; the words were strange, Myrish, Braavosi, perhaps even High Valyrian. She grabbed a passing longshoreman by the sleeve. “Please,” she said, “what ship is this?”
艾莉亚抵达码头时，周围静得出奇。她瞥见两个金袍卫士，正并排穿过鱼市，可他们看都没看她一眼。市场的摊贩空了一半，港口的船只也比她记忆中少。黑水河上，三艘国王的战船排成固定阵形巡逻，船桨起起落落，金色的船壳破浪前进。艾莉亚看了一会儿，然后开始沿河走。
“She’s the Wind Witch , out of Myr,” the man said.
当她看见站在三号码头边，身穿灰色羊毛滚白缎披风的卫士时，她的心几乎停止了跳动。临冬城的颜色，她的眼泪不禁夺眶而出。在他们身后，有一条漂亮的三桅商船，泊在码头里轻轻摆动。艾莉亚看不懂船壳上漆的字，那是种奇怪的语言，可能是密尔语、布拉佛斯语甚至高等瓦雷利亚语。她抓住一个路过的码头工的袖子。“请问，”她说，“这艘船是？”
“She’s still here,” Arya blurted. The longshoreman gave her a queer look, shrugged, and walked away. Arya ran toward the pier. The Wind Witch was the ship Father had hired to take her home … still waiting! She’d imagined it had sailed ages ago.
“密尔来的‘风之巫女’号。”那人说。
Two of the guardsmen were dicing together while the third walked rounds, his hand on the pommel of his sword. Ashamed to let them see her crying like a baby, she stopped to rub at her eyes. Her eyes her eyes her eyes, why did …
“它还在这儿啊。”艾莉亚脱口便道。码头工人神情怪异地看了她一眼，耸耸肩走了。艾莉亚朝码头跑去。风之巫女号正是父亲雇来送她回家的……它竟然还在这儿！她以为船早就开走了。
Look with your eyes , she heard Syrio whisper.
三个守卫之中，两个在赌骰子，另一个则手按剑柄来回巡视。她不能像个小婴儿一样哭哭啼啼地走过去，给他们见着了准会丢脸，于是她停下来揉揉眼睛。眼睛，眼睛，眼睛，他们为什么还……
Arya looked. She knew all of her father’s men. The three in the grey cloaks were strangers. “You,” the one walking rounds called out. “What do you want here, boy?” The other two looked up from their dice.
用你的眼睛看，西利欧的话在耳际回荡。
It was all Arya could do not to bolt and run, but she knew that if she did, they would be after her at once. She made herself walk closer. They were looking for a girl, but he thought she was a boy. She’d be a boy, then. “Want to buy a pigeon?” She showed him the dead bird.
艾莉亚仔细看去。她认得父亲所有的侍卫，但这三个穿灰披风的人她从没见过。“喂，”正在巡逻的那人叫道，“小子，你干什么？”玩骰子的两人抬起头来。
“Get out of here,” the guardsman said.
艾莉亚用尽浑身解数，才忍住惶恐，没有拔腿就跑。她知道自己若真跑了，他们会立刻追上。于是她逼自己走得更近。他们要找的是个女孩，但他把她错当成小男生了。既然如此，她就当个小男生吧。“要不要买鸽子啊？”她把死鸟拿给他看。
Arya did as he told her. She did not have to pretend to be frightened. Behind her, the men went back to their dice.
“快滚吧你。”守卫说。
She could not have said how she got back to Flea Bottom, but she was breathing hard by the time she reached the narrow crooked unpaved streets between the hills. The Bottom had a stench to it, a stink of pigsties and stables and tanner’s sheds, mixed in with the sour smell of winesinks and cheap whorehouses. Arya wound her way through the maze dully. It was not until she caught a whiff of bubbling brown coming through a pot-shop door that she realized her pigeon was gone. It must have slipped from her belt as she ran, or someone had stolen it and she’d never noticed. For a moment she wanted to cry again. She’d have to walk all the way back to the Street of Flour to find another one that plump.
艾莉亚立刻照办，她根本不需要假装害怕。她一转身，那两人又重新赌起骰子。
Far across the city, bells began to ring.
她不记得自己是怎么跑回跳蚤窝的，但当她抵达丘陵间弯弯曲曲的狭窄巷道时，差点喘不过气。跳蚤窝里有一种臭味，混杂了猪圈、马厩和皮匠棚的气息，外加酸败酒肆和廉价妓院的味道。艾莉亚在这迷宫里麻木地走着，直到经过一间食堂，闻到从门口传出的沸腾褐汤的香味，才发现鸽子没了。一定是跑的时候从腰带上掉了，不然就是有人趁她不备偷走。一时之间，她的眼泪又快掉了下来。她可得大老远走到面粉街，才找得到那么肥的鸽子哪。
Arya glanced up, listening, wondering what the ringing meant this time.
在城市遥远的另一头，钟声响起。
“What’s this now?” a fat man called from the pot-shop.
艾莉亚抬眼倾听，不禁纳闷这次的钟声又代表着什么。
“The bells again, gods ha’mercy,” wailed an old woman.
“这会儿又怎么啦？”食堂里有个胖子喊。
A red-haired whore in a wisp of painted silk pushed open a second-story window. “Is it the boy king that’s died now?” she shouted down, leaning out over the street. “Ah, that’s a boy for you, they never last long.” As she laughed, a naked man slid his arms around her from behind, biting her neck and rubbing the heavy white breasts that hung loose beneath her shift.
“天上诸神行行好，怎么这钟成天响个没完啊。”一名老妇人哀嚎。
“Stupid slut,” the fat man shouted up. “The king’s not dead, that’s only summoning bells. One tower tolling. When the king dies, they ring every bell in the city.”
邻街二楼，有个穿着轻薄彩绘丝衣的红发妓女推开窗户。“这会儿换那小鬼国王死啦？”她探身朝下喊，“我说啊，小鬼就是这德行，个个都不持久！”她正在笑，一个浑身赤裸的男人便伸手从后面抱住她，咬着她的脖子，一边隔着薄衫，用力搓揉她垂在胸前的那对白色大奶子。
“Here, quit your biting, or I’ll ring your bells,” the woman in the window said to the man behind her, pushing him off with an elbow. “So who is it died, if not the king?”
“你这没脑筋的骚货！”胖子朝二楼叫道，“国王没死，这会儿敲的是集合钟，只有一座塔里的钟在响。国王死的时候，城里每座钟都会响。”
“It’s a summoning,” the fat man repeated.
“喂，行了，行了，别咬了！再咬小心我敲你的‘钟’！”窗边的女人对身后的男人说，并用手肘推开他。“不是国王，那是谁死了哩？”
Two boys close to Arya’s age scampered past, splashing through a puddle. The old woman cursed them, but they kept right on going. Other people were moving too, heading up the hill to see what the noise was about. Arya ran after the slower boy. “Where you going?” she shouted when she was right behind him. “What’s happening?”
“这只是集合钟。”胖子重复。
He glanced back without slowing. “The gold cloaks is carryin’ him to the sept.”
两个与艾莉亚年纪相仿的男孩蹦蹦跳跳地跑过，哗啦溅起一大滩水。老妇人咒骂他们，但他们没有停步。其他人也开始陆续朝丘陵上移动，想看看究竟是怎么回事。艾莉亚追着一个动作慢的男孩跑。“你去哪儿？”跑到他背后时，她叫道，“发生了什么事？”
“Who?” she yelled, running hard.
他回头看了一眼，脚步却没慢下。“金袍子要把他带去大圣堂。”
“The Hand! They’ll be taking his head off, Buu says.”
“带谁？”她大声叫着，拼命快跑。
A passing wagon had left a deep rut in the street. The boy leapt over, but Arya never saw it. She tripped and fell, face first, scraping her knee open on a stone and smashing her fingers when her hands hit the hard-packed earth. Needle tangled between her legs. She sobbed as she struggled to her knees. The thumb of her left hand was covered with blood. When she sucked on it, she saw that half the thumbnail was gone, ripped off in her fall. Her hands throbbed, and her knee was all bloody too.
“当然是首相啊！阿布说他们要砍他的头咧。”
“Make way!” someone shouted from the cross street. “Make way for my lords of Redwyne!” It was all Arya could do to get out of the road before they ran her down, four guardsmen on huge horses, pounding past at a gallop. They wore checked cloaks, blue-and-burgundy. Behind them, two young lordlings rode side by side on a pair of chestnut mares alike as peas in a pod. Arya had seen them in the bailey a hundred times; the Redwyne twins, Ser Horas and Ser Hobber, homely youths with orange hair and square, freckled faces. Sansa and Jeyne Poole used to call them Ser Horror and Ser Slobber, and giggle whenever they caught sight of them. They did not look funny now.
一辆经过的马车在地上留下深深的车辙。男孩一跃而过，但艾莉亚没有在意，结果被这么一绊，整个人扑倒在地，一只脚擦到石头，膝盖全破了皮，指头则狠狠地撞上硬泥地，缝衣针也钩住了脚。她抽抽噎噎地挣扎着站起身，左手大拇指全是血。她把拇指伸进嘴里吸吮，才发现摔倒时断了半片指甲。她的双手痛得要命，膝盖红成一片。
Everyone was moving in the same direction, all in a hurry to see what the ringing was all about. The bells seemed louder now, clanging, calling. Arya joined the stream of people. Her thumb hurt so bad where the nail had broken that it was all she could do not to cry. She bit her lip as she limped along, listening to the excited voices around her.
“速速回避！”十字街口有人高喊，“雷德温大人驾到！速速回避！”艾莉亚好容易才从路中央跑开，差点没被活活踩死。四名穿着蓝红相间格子披风的卫士骑着高大骏马，轰隆隆地经过，在他们之后是两位贵族小少爷，肩并肩骑乘两匹栗子色母马，宛如一个盘里的豌豆。艾莉亚在城堡院子里见过他们几百次，他们是雷德温家的双胞胎，霍拉斯爵士和霍柏爵士，年纪很轻，相貌平庸，橙色头发，还有长满雀斑的方脸。珊莎和珍妮·普尔以前常背地里叫他们“恐怖爵士”和“流口水”爵士，一见到他们，就咯咯直笑。但他们现在的模样可一点都不好笑。
“—the King’s Hand, Lord Stark. They’re carrying him up to Baelor’s Sept.”
每个人都朝着同一方向前进，急着想弄清敲钟的缘故。钟声似乎越来越大，叮当做响，不停呼唤。艾莉亚加入人潮，断指甲痛得不得了，她拼命忍住才没尖叫出声。她紧咬嘴唇，一路跛行，一边倾听周围兴奋的话音。
“I heard he was dead.”
“——是御前首相史塔克大人。他们要把他带到贝勒大圣堂去。”
“Soon enough, soon enough. Here, I got me a silver stag says they lop his head off.”
“我听说他死了。”
“Past time, the traitor.” The man spat.
“就快啦，就快啦。来来来，我赌一个银鹿他们会砍他的头。”
Arya struggled to find a voice. “He never —” she started, but she was only a child and they talked right over her.
“早该砍头了，这卖国贼。”男人啐了口唾沫。
“Fool! They ain’t neither going to lop him. Since when do they knick traitors on the steps of the Great Sept?”
艾莉亚挣扎着想出声。“他才没有——”她开口，可她只是个孩子，他们的说话声完全把她盖住了。
“Well, they don’t mean to anoint him no knight. I heard it was Stark killed old King Robert. Slit his throat in the woods, and when they found him, he stood there cool as you please and said it was some old boar did for His Grace.”
“笨蛋！他们才不会砍他头哩。打哪时起叛徒砍头是在大圣堂啊？”
“Ah, that’s not true, it was his own brother did him, that Renly, him with his gold antlers.”
“呃，总不会是封他当骑士吧？我听说啊，杀咱们老国王劳勃的就是这史塔克。他在森林里割了陛下的喉咙，后来被发现时，还装作没事人似的，撒谎说陛下是被啥老野猪干掉的。”
“You shut your lying mouth, woman. You don’t know what you’re saying, his lordship’s a fine true man.”
“唉，才不是这样，杀死陛下的是他老弟，就那个头生金鹿角的蓝礼。”
By the time they reached the Street of the Sisters, they were packed in shoulder to shoulder. Arya let the human current carry her along, up to the top of Visenya’s Hill. The white marble plaza was a solid mass of people, all yammering excitedly at each other and straining to get closer to the Great Sept of Baelor. The bells were very loud here.
“臭女人，你给我闭上你那张碎嘴！少在这儿胡扯，蓝礼大人他是个正直的好人。”
Arya squirmed through the press, ducking between the legs of horses and clutching tight to her sword stick. From the middle of the crowd, all she could see were arms and legs and stomachs, and the seven slender towers of the sept looming overhead. She spotted a wood wagon and thought to climb up on the back where she might be able to see, but others had the same idea. The teamster cursed at them and drove them off with a crack of his whip.
等他们到了静默姐妹街，人群已经摩肩擦踵，挤得水泄不通。艾莉亚任由人潮将推上维桑尼亚丘顶。圣堂前的白色大理石广场满满的都是人，兴奋地彼此交谈，拥挤着希望能更靠近贝勒大圣堂。这里，钟声非常响亮。
Arya grew frantic. Forcing her way to the front of the crowd, she was shoved up against the stone of a plinth. She looked up at Baelor the Blessed, the septon king. Sliding her stick sword through her belt, Arya began to climb. Her broken thumbnail left smears of blood on the painted marble, but she made it up, and wedged herself in between the king’s feet.
艾莉亚左推右挤，在一双双马腿之间穿梭，同时还得抓紧她的剑。在人群里，她只能看到别人的手脚和肚子，以及耸立头顶的七座纤细高塔。她瞄到一辆木马车，便想爬上去，期望这样看得比较清楚，但四周的人也有相同的念头，结果车夫破口大骂，鞭子一挥把他们通通赶走。
That was when she saw her father.
艾莉亚急了，她硬是往前钻，结果被人群挤得贴在一个石头基座上。她抬起头，看到“主教国王，受神祝福的”圣贝勒的脸庞，于是艾莉亚把剑塞进腰带，开始往上爬。虽然断掉的指甲在彩绘大理石上留下斑斑血迹，但她最后还是爬了上去，楔进国王的两腿中间。
Lord Eddard stood on the High Septon’s pulpit outside the doors of the sept, supported between two of the gold cloaks. He was dressed in a rich grey velvet doublet with a white wolf sewn on the front in beads, and a grey wool cloak trimmed with fur, but he was thinner than Arya had ever seen him, his long face drawn with pain. He was not standing so much as being held up; the cast over his broken leg was grey and rotten.
她看到了父亲。
The High Septon himself stood behind him, a squat man, grey with age and ponderously fat, wearing long white robes and an immense crown of spun gold and crystal that wreathed his head with rainbows whenever he moved.
艾德公爵站在圣堂大门外的总主教讲坛上，左右各由一位金袍卫士搀扶。他穿着一件厚实的灰天鹅绒上衣，胸前用珠子绣了一只白狼，肩披灰色羊毛滚绒边斗篷，但艾莉亚从没见他这么瘦过，那张长脸上写满了痛苦。他几乎无法站立，全靠两个卫兵支撑，他断腿上的石膏是灰的，整个都烂掉了。
Clustered around the doors of the sept, in front of the raised marble pulpit, were a knot of knights and high lords. Joffrey was prominent among them, his raiment all crimson, silk and satin patterned with prancing stags and roaring lions, a gold crown on his head. His queen mother stood beside him in a black mourning gown slashed with crimson, a veil of black diamonds in her hair. Arya recognized the Hound, wearing a snowy white cloak over his dark grey armor, with four of the Kingsguard around him. She saw Varys the eunuch gliding among the lords in soft slippers and a patterned damask robe, and she thought the short man with the silvery cape and pointed beard might be the one who had once fought a duel for Mother.
站在他身后的是矮胖的总主教，年事已高，发色灰白，臃肿不堪，身着一件纯白长袍，头戴一顶由金箔和水晶做成的巨大宝冠，随着他的动作散发出七彩虹光。
And there in their midst was Sansa, dressed in sky-blue silk, with her long auburn hair washed and curled and silver bracelets on her wrists. Arya scowled, wondering what her sister was doing here, why she looked so happy.
在圣堂的大门边，在高高的讲坛前，聚集了一群骑士和贵族。乔佛里一身大红丝衣和缎子装束，绣满腾跃雄鹿与怒吼猛狮，头戴金冠，在人群之中最为显眼。王后站在他身旁，穿了一袭哀悼的黑礼服，衣上间或有几许红丝，发际戴着黑钻石头纱。艾莉亚认出了猎狗，他身穿暗灰盔甲，外罩雪白披风，旁边围绕着四个御林铁卫。她也看见了太监瓦里斯，他披着彩绘的锦缎袍子，穿了拖鞋，在贵族之间游走。至于那个披着银斗篷，生了尖胡须的矮个子，她认为就是那个曾为母亲决斗的人。
A long line of gold-cloaked spearmen held back the crowd, commanded by a stout man in elaborate armor, all black lacquer and gold filigree. His cloak had the metallic shimmer of true cloth-of-gold.
珊莎也站在这群人中间，穿了一袭天蓝丝质礼服，长长的卷曲的枣红头发放了下来，手腕上戴了好些个银手镯。艾莉亚皱起眉头，不知姐姐在这里干嘛，更不知她为何看来如此高兴。
When the bell ceased to toll, a quiet slowly settled across the great plaza, and her father lifted his head and began to speak, his voice so thin and weak she could scarcely make him out. People behind her began to shout out, “What?” and “Louder!” The man in the black-and-gold armor stepped up behind Father and prodded him sharply. You leave him alone! Arya wanted to shout, but she knew no one would listen. She chewed her lip.
在一名粗壮的中年人指挥下，一长排金袍枪兵把群众挡在外围。那人身着一副华丽盔甲，上了黑漆，镶有金线，他的披风则用货真价实的金缕缝成，闪耀着金属光泽。
Her father raised his voice and began again. “I am Eddard Stark, Lord of Winterfell and Hand of the King,” he said more loudly, his voice carrying across the plaza, “and I come before you to confess my treason in the sight of gods and men.”
钟声停止，一阵寂静慢慢地笼罩住整个大广场。父亲抬起头，开始说话，但他的声音气若游丝，她听不出他说了什么。她身后的人大声叫嚣：“搞什么？”“大声点！”接着那个身穿黑金盔甲的人踱到父亲身后，狠狠戳了他一下。你不要欺负他！艾莉亚想大喊。但她知道没人会理会的，于是她咬紧嘴唇。
“NO ,” Arya whimpered. Below her, the crowd began to scream and shout. Taunts and obscenities filled the air. Sansa had hidden her face in her hands.
父亲提高音量，重新开始：“我是临冬城公爵暨国王之手，艾德·史塔克，”他越说越响亮，声音在广场回荡。“今天我来到这里，当着天上诸神和地上凡人的面，承认我的叛国罪行。”
Her father raised his voice still higher, straining to be heard. “I betrayed the faith of my king and the trust of my friend, Robert,” he shouted. “I swore to defend and protect his children, yet before his blood was cold, I plotted to depose and murder his son and seize the throne for myself. Let the High Septon and Baelor the Beloved and the Seven bear witness to the truth of what I say: Joffrey Baratheon is the one true heir to the Iron Throne, and by the grace of all the gods, Lord of the Seven Kingdoms and Protector of the Realm.”
“不要！”艾莉亚哀嚎。她下面的群众开始大吼大叫，空中充满了各种嘲弄与脏话。珊莎则把脸深埋进双手间。
A stone came sailing out of the crowd. Arya cried out as she saw her father hit. The gold cloaks kept him from falling. Blood ran down his face from a deep gash across his forehead. More stones followed. One struck the guard to Father’s left. Another went clanging off the breastplate of the knight in the black-and-gold armor. Two of the Kingsguard stepped in front of Joffrey and the queen, protecting them with their shields.
父亲再度提高音量，努力让众人都听见。“我背叛了我的国王，我的挚友，劳勃。我背叛了他的信任与托付，”他高喊，“我发誓保护他的孩子，然而当他尸骨未寒，我便阴谋废黜并杀害他的儿子，自立为王。现在，请总主教、“受神爱护的”贝勒，以及至高七神为我所说的真相作见证：乔佛里·拜拉席恩乃铁王座惟一的合法继承人，以天上七神之名，他是七国统治者与全境守护者。”
Her hand slid beneath her cloak and found Needle in its sheath. She tightened her fingers around the grip, squeezing as hard as she had ever squeezed anything. Please, gods, keep him safe , she prayed. Don’t let them hurt my father .
人群里飞出一颗石头，击中父亲，艾莉亚见状叫出声来。金袍卫士撑着他，不让他倒下，他的前额砸出一道深深的伤口，鲜血汩汩流下。更多石头随即跟进，有一块打到了父亲左边的卫士，更有一个匡当一声，正中黑金铠甲骑士的前胸。两名御林铁卫出列挡在乔佛里和王后身前，举起盾牌保护他们。
The High Septon knelt before Joffrey and his mother. “As we sin, so do we suffer,” he intoned, in a deep swelling voice much louder than Father’s. “This man has confessed his crimes in the sight of gods and men, here in this holy place.” Rainbows danced around his head as he lifted his hands in entreaty. “The gods are just, yet Blessed Baelor taught us that they are also merciful. What shall be done with this traitor, Your Grace?”
她的手伸到斗篷下，抽出鞘里的缝衣针。她使出浑身力气，紧紧握住剑柄。天上诸神，求求你们，请你们保护他，她暗自祷告，别让他们伤害我父亲。
A thousand voices were screaming, but Arya never heard them. Prince Joffrey … no, King Joffrey … stepped out from behind the shields of his Kingsguard. “My mother bids me let Lord Eddard take the black, and Lady Sansa has begged mercy for her father.” He looked straight at Sansa then, and smiled , and for a moment Arya thought that the gods had heard her prayer, until Joffrey turned back to the crowd and said, “But they have the soft hearts of women. So long as I am your king, treason shall never go unpunished. Ser Ilyn, bring me his head!”
总主教在乔佛里和他母亲面前跪下。“因为我们有罪，所以我们受苦，”他用浑厚而低沉的声音吟诵，音量比父亲大上许多。“此人当着天上诸神与地上凡人的面，于此神圣之处所坦承其罪行。”他高举双手祈求，头际闪耀七彩虹光。“天上诸神是公正的，然而‘受神祝福的’贝勒曾教导我们，他们同时也是慈悲的。国王陛下，请问该如何处置这名叛徒呢？”
The crowd roared, and Arya felt the statue of Baelor rock as they surged against it. The High Septon clutched at the king’s cape, and Varys came rushing over waving his arms, and even the queen was saying something to him, but Joffrey shook his head. Lords and knights moved aside as he stepped through, tall and fleshless, a skeleton in iron mail, the King’s Justice. Dimly, as if from far off, Arya heard her sister scream. Sansa had fallen to her knees, sobbing hysterically. Ser Ilyn Payne climbed the steps of the pulpit.
四周众声喧哗，但艾莉亚全不在意。乔佛里王子……不，是乔佛里“国王”……从御林铁卫的盾牌后方踱步而出。“我的母亲敦请我让艾德公爵穿上黑衣，珊莎小姐也多次为她父亲求情。”说完，他直直地盯着珊莎，面露微笑，一时间，艾莉亚以为天上诸神当真听见了她的祈祷，但乔佛里随即转身面对群众，“那是她们软弱的妇女心肠使然。只要我一日为王，叛国之罪必将严惩！伊林爵士，给我砍下他的头！”
Arya wriggled between Baelor’s feet and threw herself into the crowd, drawing Needle. She landed on a man in a butcher’s apron, knocking him to the ground. Immediately someone slammed into her back and she almost went down herself. Bodies closed in around her, stumbling and pushing, trampling on the poor butcher. Arya slashed at them with Needle.
群众哗然。他们纷纷向前推挤，艾莉亚只觉贝勒的雕像也跟着摇晃。总主教抓住国王的披风，瓦里斯则冲上前来指手画脚，就连王后都对他说着些什么，但乔佛里只摇摇头。贵族和骑士让开一条路，“他”走了出来。御前执法官伊林·派恩爵士，身躯高大，骨瘦如柴，活像一具穿着铁甲的骷髅。艾莉亚隐约听到姐姐的尖叫，从遥远的地方传来。珊莎双膝一跪，歇斯底里地啜泣。伊林爵士爬上讲坛的阶梯。
High atop the pulpit, Ser Ilyn Payne gestured and the knight in black-and-gold gave a command. The gold cloaks flung Lord Eddard to the marble, with his head and chest out over the edge.
艾莉亚从贝勒的双脚间扭出身子，握着缝衣针，跳进人群。她正跳到一个穿屠夫围裙的人身上，把那人撞倒在地，但立刻就有人轰然撞上她的背，害她也险些跟着摔倒。四周都是身躯，跌跌撞撞，相互推挤，把可怜的屠夫踩在脚下。艾莉亚拿起缝衣针朝他们挥砍。
“Here, you!” an angry voice shouted at Arya, but she bowled past, shoving people aside, squirming between them, slamming into anyone in her way. A hand fumbled at her leg and she hacked at it, kicked at shins. A woman stumbled and Arya ran up her back, cutting to both sides, but it was no good, no good , there were too many people, no sooner did she make a hole than it closed again. Someone buffeted her aside. She could still hear Sansa screaming.
在高高的讲坛上，伊林·派恩爵士做了个手势，黑金铠甲的骑士立即下达命令。金袍卫士把艾德大人按在大理石板上，头和胸露出台子边缘。
Ser Ilyn drew a two-handed greatsword from the scabbard on his back. As he lifted the blade above his head, sunlight seemed to ripple and dance down the dark metal, glinting off an edge sharper than any razor. Ice , she thought, he has Ice! Her tears streamed down her face, blinding her.
“喂！干什么啊你！”一个愤怒的声音对艾莉亚大吼，但她浑不关心，她或把人推开，或从中钻过，谁要挡路就一头撞去。有人伸手抓她的脚，她挥剑便砍，又用力踢中对方胫骨。有位女人摔倒，艾莉亚立刻跳上她的背，一边朝左右猛砍，可是没用，完全没用，人实在是太多了，无论何处，她才瞥见缺口，瞬间又被人填满。有人在殴打她，想把她赶开。她惟一能分辨的是珊莎的尖叫。
And then a hand shot out of the press and closed round her arm like a wolf trap, so hard that Needle went flying from her hand. Arya was wrenched off her feet. She would have fallen if he hadn’t held her up, as easy as if she were a doll. A face pressed close to hers, long black hair and tangled beard and rotten teeth. “Don’t look!” a thick voice snarled at her.
伊林爵士从背后抽出一把双手巨剑，当他把剑高举过头时，阳光在沉暗的金属上舞跃波动，那剑锋比任何剃刀都要锐利。寒冰，她意识到，他拿的是寒冰！眼泪流下两颊，遮住了视线。
“I … I … I …” Arya sobbed.
正在这时，一只手从人群中飞速窜出，如捕狼的陷阱般紧紧扣住她的手臂，力道之大，使得缝衣针从手里飞了出去。艾莉亚被抓离地面，她觉得自己好像个洋娃娃，被轻易地擒来抱去。一张脸贴上了来，这张脸有黑长发，还有纠结的胡须和烂掉的牙齿。“不要看！”对方粗声粗气地对她咆哮。
The old man shook her so hard her teeth rattled. “Shut your mouth and close your eyes, boy.” Dimly, as if from far away, she heard a … a noise … a soft sighing sound, as if a million people had let out their breath at once. The old man’s fingers dug into her arm, stiff as iron. “Look at me. Yes, that’s the way of it, at me.” Sour wine perfumed his breath. “Remember, boy?”
“我……我……我……”艾莉亚抽抽噎噎地哭着。
It was the smell that did it. Arya saw the matted greasy hair, the patched, dusty black cloak that covered his twisted shoulders, the hard black eyes squinting at her. And she remembered the black brother who had come to visit her father.
老人用力摇她，摇得她牙齿喀喀作响。“小子，你给我乖乖闭嘴，把眼睛也闭上。”隐隐约约，仿佛从很遥远的地方，她听见……一个声音……一声轻轻的叹息，好似几百万人同时舒了一口气。老人铁一般的手指抠进她的手臂。“看着我，没错，就这样，看着我就好。”他满口酒臭。“小子，记得我么？”
“Know me now, do you? There’s a bright boy.” He spat. “They’re done here. You’ll be coming with me, and you’ll be keeping your mouth shut.” When she started to reply, he shook her again, even harder. “Shut , I said.”
这个味道起了作用。艾莉亚看着他那头油腻的乱发，满是灰尘和补丁的黑斗篷，扭曲的肩膀，以及那双直直盯着她的坚定黑眼珠，想起了曾来拜访父亲的黑衣弟兄。
The plaza was beginning to empty. The press dissolved around them as people drifted back to their lives. But Arya’s life was gone. Numb, she trailed along beside … Yoren, yes, his name is Yoren . She did not recall him finding Needle, until he handed the sword back to her. “Hope you can use that, boy.”
“认出我了吧，对不对？这才是好孩子。”他啐了一口，“这儿没什么好看的。你跟我走，把嘴巴闭上。”她正要回答，他更用力地摇她。“我说了，把嘴巴闭上。”
“I’m not—” she started.
广场上的群众开始散去，人潮渐息，人们纷纷返回各自的生活。只是艾莉亚的生活却已经找不着了，她麻木地跟着他……尤伦，对了，他叫尤伦。她不记得他回去找过缝衣针，可他却把剑还给她。“小子，希望这东西你真的会用。”
He shoved her into a doorway, thrust dirty fingers through her hair, and gave it a twist, yanking her head back. “—not a smart boy , that what you mean to say?”
“我不是——”她开口。
He had a knife in his other hand.
他把她推进一道门，伸出脏兮兮的手指，抓住她的头发往后一扯。“——不是个聪明小子，你是不是要说这个？”
As the blade flashed toward her face, Arya threw herself backward, kicking wildly, wrenching her head from side to side, but he had her by the hair, so strong , she could feel her scalp tearing, and on her lips the salt taste of tears.
他另一只手里握着匕首。
*BRAN
眼见刀子朝她迎面逼近，艾莉亚猛地往后撞去，两脚狂踢，死命扭头，但他抓住了她的头发，力气好大，她觉得头皮都被扯了下来。唇上，是咸咸的泪水。
T he oldest were men grown, seventeen and eighteen years from the day of their naming. One was past twenty. Most were younger, sixteen or less.
第六十七章 布兰
Bran watched them from the balcony of Maester Luwin’s turret, listening to them grunt and strain and curse as they swung their staves and wooden swords. The yard was alive to the clack of wood on wood, punctuated all too often by thwacks and yowls of pain when a blow struck leather or flesh. Ser Rodrik strode among the boys, face reddening beneath his white whiskers, muttering at them one and all. Bran had never seen the old knight look so fierce. “No,” he kept saying. “No. No. No.”
他们之中最年长的已经成年，达到十七八岁，还有一个年过二十。但多数人都很年轻，在十六岁以下。
“They don’t fight very well,” Bran said dubiously. He scratched Summer idly behind the ears as the direwolf tore at a haunch of meat. Bones crunched between his teeth.
布兰在鲁温师傅塔楼的阳台上观看他们挥舞棍棒和木剑，气喘吁吁，闷哼和咒骂。木头敲击的喀啦声响彻校场，不时还传来挨揍时发出的号叫。罗德利克爵士迈着大步，在男孩群里走来走去，白胡子下脸红成一片，嘴里念念有词，布兰从没见老骑士的表情如此严厉过。“不行，”他不停念叨，“不行，不行，不行啊！”
“For a certainty,” Maester Luwin agreed with a deep sigh. The maester was peering through his big Myrish lens tube, measuring shadows and noting the position of the comet that hung low in the morning sky. “Yet given time … Ser Rodrik has the truth of it, we need men to walk the walls. Your lord father took the cream of his guard to King’s Landing, and your brother took the rest, along with all the likely lads for leagues around. Many will not come back to us, and we must needs find the men to take their places.”
“他们打得不太好。”布兰怀疑地说。他漫不经心地搔搔夏天的耳背，冰原狼啃着一块后腿肉，牙齿咬得骨头嘎吱作晌。
Bran stared resentfully at the sweating boys below. “If I still had my legs, I could beat them all.” He remembered the last time he’d held a sword in his hand, when the king had come to Winterfell. It was only a wooden sword, yet he’d knocked Prince Tommen down half a hundred times. “Ser Rodrik should teach me to use a poleaxe. If I had a poleaxe with a big long haft, Hodor could be my legs. We could be a knight together.”
“没错，”鲁温师傅长叹一声，表示同意。老学士正用长长的密尔透镜管测量影子，计算低挂在晨空中的彗星的位置。“他们得多花时间训练……罗德利克爵士考虑周到，我们需要人手防守城堡。城里精锐的卫士都被你父亲大人带去君临，你哥哥又把剩下的全部带走，方圆几里格内可用的年轻人也都跟着他走了，许多人一去就不会回来。我们得找人代替他们的位置。”
“I think that … unlikely,” Maester Luwin said. “Bran, when a man fights, his arms and legs and thoughts must be as one.”
布兰愤恨地看着楼下汗流浃背的男孩。“如果我还能走路，他们谁都打不过我。”他记得自己最后一次握剑，是国王到临冬城来的时候，只是用把木剑，他却把托曼王子打倒在地好多次。“罗德利克爵士应该教我用斧子，我去做一把长柄斧，就可以让阿多当我的脚，我们一起当骑士。”
Below in the yard, Ser Rodrik was yelling. “You fight like a goose. He pecks you and you peck him harder. Parry! Block the blow. Goose fighting will not suffice. If those were real swords, the first peck would take your arm off!” One of the other boys laughed, and the old knight rounded on him. “You laugh. You. Now that is gall. You fight like a hedgehog …”
“我想这……恐怕不太可能。”鲁温师傅说，“布兰，打仗的时候，人必须手脚和思想完全一致才行。”
“There was a knight once who couldn’t see,” Bran said stubbornly, as Ser Rodrik went on below. “Old Nan told me about him. He had a long staff with blades at both ends and he could spin it in his hands and chop two men at once.”
下方的场子里，罗德利克爵士正在高喊：“你们打起来活像呆头鹅，他啄一下，你啄回去，要挡啊！把攻击挡下来！打架像鹅怎么成？这是真剑的话，啄一下你的手就没啦！”旁边一个男孩忍不住笑出声，老骑士立刻转身面对他。“你觉得好笑？啊？你到底懂不懂礼貌？你瞧瞧你，打起来像刺猬……”
“Symeon Star-Eyes,” Luwin said as he marked numbers in a book. “When he lost his eyes, he put star sapphires in the empty sockets, or so the singers claim. Bran, that is only a story, like the tales of Florian the Fool. A fable from the Age of Heroes.” The maester tsked . “You must put these dreams aside, they will only break your heart.”
“从前有个骑士眼睛看不见，”布兰固执地说。罗德利克爵士在下面继续喝骂。“老奶妈跟我说，他有一根长长的棍子，两边都有尖刀，他可以拿在手中转，一次砍两个人。”
The mention of dreams reminded him. “I dreamed about the crow again last night. The one with three eyes. He flew into my bedchamber and told me to come with him, so I did. We went down to the crypts. Father was there, and we talked. He was sad.”
“那是‘星眼’赛米恩，”鲁温边说边在簿子上做记号。“失去双眼之后，他把星辰蓝宝石放进空空的眼窝，吟游诗人是这么唱的。可布兰啊，那只是个故事，就像傻瓜佛罗理安的故事一样，都是从英雄纪元流传下来的寓言。”老学士啧了一声。“你要学着抛开这些白日梦，它们只会伤你心的。”
“And why was that?” Luwin peered through his tube.
说到了白日梦，倒是提醒了他。“我昨晚又梦见了那只乌鸦，就是生了三只眼睛的那只。它飞进我的卧房，要我跟它一起走，我就随它去了。我们飞下墓窖，父亲正在那里，我和他说了话。他很难过。”
“It was something to do about Jon, I think.” The dream had been deeply disturbing, more so than any of the other crow dreams. “Hodor won’t go down into the crypts.”
“为什么难过？”鲁温透过镜管向外看。
The maester had only been half listening, Bran could tell. He lifted his eye from the tube, blinking. “Hodor won’t …?”
“我记得……好像是和琼恩有关的事，”这个梦令他很不舒服，比其他有乌鸦的梦更甚。“后来阿多不肯下墓窖去。”
“Go down into the crypts. When I woke, I told him to take me down, to see if Father was truly there. At first he didn’t know what I was saying, but I got him to the steps by telling him to go here and go there, only then he wouldn’t go down. He just stood on the top step and said ‘Hodor,’ like he was scared of the dark, but I had a torch. It made me so mad I almost gave him a swat in the head, like Old Nan is always doing.” He saw the way the maester was frowning and hurriedly added, “I didn’t, though.”
布兰看得出，老师傅有些心不在焉。他把眼睛从镜管上抬起，眨了眨。“阿多不肯怎样？”
“Good. Hodor is a man, not a mule to be beaten.”
“不肯下墓窖去。我醒来之后，叫他带我下去，看看父亲是不是真的在那里。起初他不明白我在说什么，我只好叫他到这到那，最后走到楼梯边，但他却死活不肯下去。他就站在楼梯口，说着‘阿多’，好像他怕黑，可我有火把啊。我好生气，差点就像老奶妈一样敲他的头。”他见老师傅皱起眉头，赶忙补充一句，“不过我没敲啦。”
“In the dream I flew down with the crow, but I can’t do that when I’m awake,” Bran explained.
“很好。阿多是个人，不能像驴子一样随便打的。”
“Why would you want to go down to the crypts?”
“在梦里，我跟乌鸦一起飞下去，可我醒来以后就飞不了了。”布兰解释。
“I told you. To look for Father.”
“你为什么想到墓窖去？”
The maester tugged at the chain around his neck, as he often did when he was uncomfortable. “Bran, sweet child, one day Lord Eddard will sit below in stone, beside his father and his father’s father and all the Starks back to the old Kings in the North … but that will not be for many years, gods be good. Your father is a prisoner of the queen in King’s Landing. You will not find him in the crypts.”
“我跟你说了啊，去找父亲嘛。”
“He was there last night. I talked to him.”
学士扯扯脖子上的项链，他觉得不安的时候常会这么做。“布兰，好孩子，总有一天艾德大人会化身石像，坐在地底墓窖，和他的父亲、祖父，以及古代冬境之王以来所有的史塔克家人团聚……但愿诸神保佑，那是很多年以后的事。你父亲现下人在君临，是太后的阶下囚，你到了墓窖也找不到他的。”
“Stubborn boy,” the maester sighed, setting his book aside. “Would you like to go see?”
“可他昨天晚上真的在啊，我还跟他讲话呢。”
“I can’t. Hodor won’t go, and the steps are too narrow and twisty for Dancer.”
“好个固执的孩子。”老师傅叹口气，把簿子挪到一边。“你想下去看看？”
“I believe I can solve that difficulty.”
“我去不了，阿多又不肯，楼梯太窄还曲折得厉害，所以小舞也不行。”
In place of Hodor, the wildling woman Osha was summoned. She was tall and tough and uncomplaining, willing to go wherever she was commanded. “I lived my life beyond the Wall, a hole in the ground won’t fret me none, m’lords,” she said.
“我想这还难不倒我。”
“Summer, come,” Bran called as she lifted him in wiry-strong arms. The direwolf left his bone and followed as Osha carried Bran across the yard and down the spiral steps to the cold vault under the earth. Maester Luwin went ahead with a torch. Bran did not even mind—too badly—that she carried him in her arms and not on her back. Ser Rodrik had ordered Osha’s chain struck off, since she had served faithfully and well since she had been at Winterfell. She still wore the heavy iron shackles around her ankles—a sign that she was not yet wholly trusted—but they did not hinder her sure strides down the steps.
于是他找来女野人欧莎代替阿多，她身高体壮，又从不抱怨，叫她去哪里就去哪里。“大人，咱打小在长城外长大，一个地洞吓不倒我，”她保证。
Bran could not recall the last time he had been in the crypts. It had been before , for certain. When he was little, he used to play down here with Robb and Jon and his sisters.
“夏天，过来。”欧莎伸出精瘦而结实双手抱起布兰，布兰一边唤道。冰原狼立刻丢下骨头，跟随欧莎穿过校场，走下螺旋阶梯，来到地底的冰冷墓窖。鲁温师傅走在最前，手持火把。布兰不在意——不太在意——被她抱着，而非背在身后。罗德利克爵士已命人砍断欧莎的脚链，因为她来到临冬城之后，不仅忠心耿耿，而且工作又有效率。两个重镣环虽仍在她踝上——表示她还未得到完全的信赖——却不影响她下楼梯的稳健步伐。
He wished they were here now; the vault might not have seemed so dark and scary. Summer stalked out in the echoing gloom, then stopped, lifted his head, and sniffed the chill dead air. He bared his teeth and crept backward, eyes glowing golden in the light of the maester’s torch. Even Osha, hard as old iron, seemed uncomfortable. “Grim folk, by the look of them,” she said as she eyed the long row of granite Starks on their stone thrones.
布兰不记得自己上次到墓窖来是什么时候的事了，但可以确定，是意外发生之前。他小时候常与罗柏、琼恩及姐姐们在这下面玩耍。
“They were the Kings of Winter,” Bran whispered. Somehow it felt wrong to talk too loudly in this place.
他好希望这会儿他们都在，那样的话，墓窖就不会这么阴森吓人。夏天潜入充满回音的幽暗，停下脚步，抬起头，嗅嗅死寂的冰冷空气。随后它张嘴露出尖牙，缓步向后爬开，在学士的火炬照耀下，它的双眼闪着金光。即便刚强如铁的欧莎，此刻也觉得有些不自在。“看起来都是些阴森的家伙。”她一边扫视长排的大理石王座，一边说，上面坐着历代的史塔克。
Osha smiled. “Winter’s got no king. If you’d seen it, you’d know that, summer boy.”
“他们是冬境之王。”布兰低声道。不知怎地，他觉得在这里似乎不应该大声讲话。
“They were the Kings in the North for thousands of years,” Maester Luwin said, lifting the torch high so the light shone on the stone faces. Some were hairy and bearded, shaggy men fierce as the wolves that crouched by their feet. Others were shaved clean, their features gaunt and sharp-edged as the iron longswords across their laps. “Hard men for a hard time. Come.” He strode briskly down the vault, past the procession of stone pillars and the endless carved figures. A tongue of flame trailed back from the upraised torch as he went.
欧莎微微一笑。“冬天是没有国王的。假如你亲眼见识过凛冬的威力，你就知道啦，夏天的小子。”
The vault was cavernous, longer than Winterfell itself, and Jon had told him once that there were other levels underneath, vaults even deeper and darker where the older kings were buried. It would not do to lose the light. Summer refused to move from the steps, even when Osha followed the torch, Bran in her arms.
“他们在北境称王长达数千年之久，”鲁温师傅说着举起火把，照亮石像的脸庞。它们有的头发极长，生了大胡子，毛茸而坚毅的脸有如趴伏脚下的冰原狼；有的则是修面整洁，五官憔悴而锐利，有如横放膝上的铁剑。“他们都是生长在艰苦环境中的坚毅之人。来吧。”他快步朝墓窖深处走去，经过一排排石柱和无数的雕像，手中高举的火把向后曳出一条长舌。
“Do you recall your history, Bran?” the maester said as they walked. “Tell Osha who they were and what they did, if you can.”
墓窖宽阔，比临冬城本身还长。琼恩曾对他说，在墓窖底下，更深更幽暗的地方，还有其他墓穴，年代更久远的古代君王便睡在那里。这样看来，如果火把熄灭，那可就糟了。夏天不肯离开楼梯，只有欧莎怀抱布兰，跟着火把。
He looked at the passing faces and the tales came back to him. The maester had told him the stories, and Old Nan had made them come alive. “That one is Jon Stark. When the sea raiders landed in the east, he drove them out and built the castle at White Harbor. His son was Rickard Stark, not my father’s father but another Rickard, he took the Neck away from the Marsh King and married his daughter. Theon Stark’s the real thin one with the long hair and the skinny beard. They called him the ‘Hungry Wolf,’ because he was always at war. That’s a Brandon, the tall one with the dreamy face, he was Brandon the Shipwright, because he loved the sea. His tomb is empty. He tried to sail west across the Sunset Sea and was never seen again. His son was Brandon the Burner, because he put the torch to all his father’s ships in grief. There’s Rodrik Stark, who won Bear Island in a wrestling match and gave it to the Mormonts. And that’s Torrhen Stark, the King Who Knelt. He was the last King in the North and the first Lord of Winterfell, after he yielded to Aegon the Conqueror. Oh, there, he’s Cregan Stark. He fought with Prince Aemon once, and the Dragonknight said he’d never faced a finer swordsman.” They were almost at the end now, and Bran felt a sadness creeping over him. “And there’s my grandfather, Lord Rickard, who was beheaded by Mad King Aerys. His daughter Lyanna and his son Brandon are in the tombs beside him. Not me, another Brandon, my father’s brother. They’re not supposed to have statues, that’s only for the lords and the kings, but my father loved them so much he had them done.”
“布兰，学过的历史还记得么？”学士边走边说，“如果你还没忘掉，就告诉欧莎这些人是谁，以及他们的生平事迹吧。”
“The maid’s a fair one,” Osha said.
于是他环顾经过的张张脸庞，属于他们的故事便纷纷涌现。这些故事虽是鲁温师傅告诉他的，但使他们鲜活还得归功于老奶妈。“那个是琼恩·史塔克，海盗从东方来袭时，他把他们打退，并在白港盖了城堡。他的儿子是瑞卡德·史塔克，不是我爷爷，而是另一个瑞卡德，他从沼泽王手中夺走颈泽，并娶了沼泽王的女儿为妻。那个很瘦很瘦，长头发尖胡子的是席恩·史塔克，大家叫他“饿狼”，因为他一天到晚打仗。那个个子很高，一副做梦模样的国王也叫布兰登，‘造船者’布兰登，他很喜欢海洋。他的坟墓是空的，因为他乘船向西横渡落日之海，从此下落不明。他的儿子是‘焚船者’布兰登，他在伤心之余，纵火烧掉了父亲所有的船只。那个是罗德利克·史塔克，传说他在一场摔角比赛里赢得了熊岛，并把熊岛赠送给莫尔蒙家族。那个就是‘降服王’托伦·史塔克，最后的北境之王，第一个临冬城公爵，是他向征服者伊耿投降。噢，你看那边，他是克雷根·史塔克，曾经和伊蒙王子决斗，后来，龙骑士说这辈子再没碰上比他更优秀的剑手。”他们几乎走到了末端，布兰只觉一阵哀伤涌上心头。“那是我爷爷，瑞卡德公爵，他被‘疯王’伊里斯处死。他女儿莱安娜和他儿子布兰登就在他身旁的坟墓里。不是我，是另一个布兰登，我父亲的哥哥。他们原本不该有雕像的，那是公爵和国王才享有的荣耀，可父亲实在太爱他们，所以也为他们造了雕像。”
“Robert was betrothed to marry her, but Prince Rhaegar carried her off and raped her,” Bran explained. “Robert fought a war to win her back. He killed Rhaegar on the Trident with his hammer, but Lyanna died and he never got her back at all.”
“这女孩很漂亮。”欧莎说。
“A sad tale,” said Osha, “but those empty holes are sadder.”
“劳勃和她已经订了婚，雷加王子却把她强行掳走，并强暴了她。”布兰解释，“为了救她回来，劳勃挑起了一场战争，他在三叉戟河上用自己的战锤亲手杀了雷加，但莱安娜却已经死去，他最后还是来不及救她。”
“Lord Eddard’s tomb, for when his time comes,” Maester Luwin said. “Is this where you saw your father in your dream, Bran?”
“真是个悲伤的故事，”欧莎说，“但那几个空空的洞更教人难过。”
“Yes.” The memory made him shiver. He looked around the vault uneasily, the hairs on the back of his neck bristling. Had he heard a noise? Was there someone here?
“以后，那里就是艾德大人的坟墓，”鲁温师傅道，“布兰，你梦中就是在这里看到你父亲的吗？”
Maester Luwin stepped toward the open sepulchre, torch in hand. “As you see, he’s not here. Nor will he be, for many a year. Dreams are only dreams, child.” He thrust his arm into the blackness inside the tomb, as into the mouth of some great beast. “Do you see? It’s quite empt—”
“是啊。”回忆令他颤抖，他不安地环顾墓窖，颈背毛发竖立。他好像听见了什么？难道这里还有别人？
The darkness sprang at him, snarling.
鲁温师傅举着火把，朝敞开的坟墓走去。“你看，他不在这儿，他还要等好多好多年才会在这儿。孩子，梦，不过就是梦。”他伸手探进墓穴中的黑暗，活像探进怪兽的巨口。“你看清楚了，这里空得——”
Bran saw eyes like green fire, a flash of teeth, fur as black as the pit around them. Maester Luwin yelled and threw up his hands. The torch went flying from his fingers, caromed off the stone face of Brandon Stark, and tumbled to the statue’s feet, the flames licking up his legs. In the drunken shifting torchlight, they saw Luwin struggling with the direwolf, beating at his muzzle with one hand while the jaws closed on the other.
黑暗咆哮着朝他扑来。
“Summer!” Bran screamed.
一双宛如绿火的眼睛，一排闪烁即逝的洁白利齿，还有黑得像所处墓穴的毛皮。鲁温师傅大叫一声，扬起双手。火把从他指间飞了出去，撞到布兰登·史塔克的石脸，反弹开来，滚落至雕像脚边，火舌舔上他的小腿。在宛如醺醉的摇曳光线下，他们看见鲁温正与一头冰原狼搏斗，他的一只手拼命捶打狼嘴，另一只手则被狼牢牢咬住。
And Summer came, shooting from the dimness behind them, a leaping shadow. He slammed into Shaggydog and knocked him back, and the two direwolves rolled over and over in a tangle of grey and black fur, snapping and biting at each other, while Maester Luwin struggled to his knees, his arm torn and bloody. Osha propped Bran up against Lord Rickard’s stone wolf as she hurried to assist the maester. In the light of the guttering torch, shadow wolves twenty feet tall fought on the wall and roof.
“夏天！”布兰尖叫。
“Shaggy,” a small voice called. When Bran looked up, his little brother was standing in the mouth of Father’s tomb. With one final snap at Summer’s face, Shaggydog broke off and bounded to Rickon’s side. “You let my father be,” Rickon warned Luwin. “You let him be.”
夏天立刻从身后的昏暗中射出，有如一个奔跃的影子，一头把毛毛狗撞开，两只冰原狼在地上来回翻滚，灰色和黑色的毛皮纠结在一起，互相撕扯啮咬。鲁温师傅挣扎着起身，欧莎让布兰斜靠在瑞卡德公爵的石狼身上，急忙过去帮老学士的忙。摇曳的火光一照，狼影成了二十尺高的庞然大物，在墙壁和天顶上拼斗。
“Rickon,” Bran said softly. “Father’s not here.”
“毛毛。”一个小小的声音唤道。布兰抬头，发现他的小弟正站在父亲坟墓的进口。毛毛狗朝夏天的脸咬了最后一口，回身奔至瑞肯身旁。“你别来烦我爸爸，”瑞肯警告鲁温，“你别烦他。”
“Yes he is. I saw him.” Tears glistened on Rickon’s face. “I saw him last night.”
“瑞肯，”布兰轻声说，“父亲不在这里。”
“In your dream …?”
“他明明就在，我看到的，”瑞肯脸上泪水晶莹。“我昨晚上看到的。”
Rickon nodded. “You leave him. You leave him be. He’s coming home now, like he promised. He’s coming home.”
“你梦见……？”
Bran had never seen Maester Luwin look so uncertain before. Blood dripped down his arm where Shaggydog had shredded the wool of his sleeve and the flesh beneath. “Osha, the torch,” he said, biting through his pain, and she snatched it up before it went out. Soot stains blackened both legs of his uncle’s likeness. “That … that beast,” Luwin went on, “is supposed to be chained up in the kennels.”
瑞肯点点头。“你别来烦他，别来伤他，他要回家了，他答应过我的，他要回家了。”
Rickon patted Shaggydog’s muzzle, damp with blood. “I let him loose. He doesn’t like chains.” He licked at his fingers.
布兰从未见鲁温师傅这么犹豫不决。毛毛狗撕裂了他的羊毛衣袖，暴露的手臂不住淌血。“欧莎，把火把拿来。”他强忍着痛说，那火炬尚未熄灭，她拾起来交给他。伯伯雕像的双腿都被熏黑了。“那……那头野东西，”鲁温续道，“应该是被拴在狗舍里。”
“Rickon,” Bran said, “would you like to come with me?”
瑞肯拍拍毛毛狗血染的嘴巴。“我把它放出来了。它不喜欢被拴着。”他舔舔手指。
“No. I like it here.”
“瑞肯，”布兰说，“要不要跟我回去？”
“It’s dark here. And cold.”
“不要，我喜欢待在这里。”
“I’m not afraid. I have to wait for Father.”
“可这里又黑又冷。”
“You can wait with me,” Bran said. “We’ll wait together, you and me and our wolves.” Both of the direwolves were licking wounds now, and would bear close watching.
“我不怕。我要等爸爸回来。”
“Bran,” the maester said firmly, “I know you mean well, but Shaggydog is too wild to run loose. I’m the third man he’s savaged. Give him the freedom of the castle and it’s only a question of time before he kills someone. The truth is hard, but the wolf has to be chained, or …” He hesitated.
“你可以跟我一起等啊，”布兰说，“你和我，还有我们的小狼，我们一起等他回来。”这时两只冰原狼都舔起伤口，经此恶斗，他们需要悉心照料。
… or killed , Bran thought, but what he said was, “He was not made for chains. We will wait in your tower, all of us.”
“布兰，”学士坚定地说，“我知道你是好意，但毛毛狗性子太野，不能让它这样乱跑。我是第三个被他咬伤的人了。假如让它在城里随意活动，迟早会闹出人命。事实很难接受，可这只狼一定得拴起来，否则……”他犹豫了一下。
“That is quite impossible,” Maester Luwin said.
……就得杀掉，布兰心想，然而他却说：“它生来就不是被拴的，就让我们一起到你的塔里等嘛。”
Osha grinned. “The boy’s the lordling here, as I recall.” She handed Luwin back his torch and scooped Bran up into her arms again. “The maester’s tower it is.”
“这实在不可能。”鲁温师傅道。
“Will you come, Rickon?”
欧莎嘻嘻笑道：“我没记错的话，这里该由这孩子当家，”她把火炬交还鲁温，抱起布兰。“所以就到学士的塔里去吧。”
His brother nodded. “If Shaggy comes too,” he said, running after Osha and Bran, and there was nothing Maester Luwin could do but follow, keeping a wary eye on the wolves.
“瑞肯，要一起来么？”
Maester Luwin’s turret was so cluttered that it seemed to Bran a wonder that he ever found anything. Tottering piles of books covered tables and chairs, rows of stoppered jars lined the shelves, candle stubs and puddles of dried wax dotted the furniture, the bronze Myrish lens tube sat on a tripod by the terrace door, star charts hung from the walls, shadow maps lay scattered among the rushes, papers, quills, and pots of inks were everywhere, and all of it was spotted with droppings from the ravens in the rafters. Their strident quorks drifted down from above as Osha washed and cleaned and bandaged the maester’s wounds, under Luwin’s terse instruction. “This is folly,” the small grey man said while she dabbed at the wolf bites with a stinging ointment. “I agree that it is odd that both you boys dreamed the same dream, yet when you stop to consider it, it’s only natural. You miss your lord father, and you know that he is a captive. Fear can fever a man’s mind and give him queer thoughts. Rickon is too young to comprehend—”
弟弟点点头。“如果毛毛也一起去的话。”说完他跑在欧莎和布兰后面，这下子，鲁温师傅也只好跟上，不过他还是充满戒心地看着两只狼。
“I’m four now,” Rickon said. He was peeking through the lens tube at the gargoyles on the First Keep. The direwolves sat on opposite sides of the large round room, licking their wounds and gnawing on bones.
鲁温学士的塔里到处堆满了物品，他居然还能从中找到东西，布兰觉得简直就是奇迹。书籍在桌椅上堆得老高，架子上陈列着一排排瓶瓶罐罐，家具上则满是烧剩的蜡烛和干涸的蜡滴，那根密尔制的青铜镜管就端坐在阳台门边的三角架上，墙上挂着星象图，草席上摊着散乱的地图，纸张、羽毛笔和墨水瓶则随处可见，许多东西都沾上了居住屋梁间的渡鸦所遗留的粪便。欧莎听从鲁温简洁的指示，替他清洗伤口，着手包扎。头顶的乌鸦不停地嘎嘎叫唤。“这样的想法真是荒唐，”她为他在狼咬的伤口涂上一种气味扑鼻的膏药，头发灰白的瘦小学士一边说，“我承认，你们两个同时做了相同的梦，咋看起来的确很怪，但仔细一想，其实非常自然。你们想念你们的父亲大人，也知道他如今身遭囚禁。恐惧会影响人的思绪，让人产生奇怪的念头。瑞肯年纪还小，不了解——”
“—too young, and—ooh , seven hells, that burns, no, don’t stop, more. Too young, as I say, but you, Bran, you’re old enough to know that dreams are only dreams.”
“我已经四岁了。”瑞肯说。他正透过镜管，眺望首堡上的石像鬼。两只冰原狼各据偌大的圆形房间的一端，舔着伤口，啃食骨头。
“Some are, some aren’t.” Osha poured pale red firemilk into a long gash. Luwin gasped. “The children of the forest could tell you a thing or two about dreaming.”
“——年纪还小，所以——哎哟，七层地狱，还真痛。不，别停下，多抹点。正如我刚才所说，他年纪还小，但布兰你应该知道：梦是没有任何意义的。”
Tears were streaming down the maester’s face, yet he shook his head doggedly. “The children … live only in dreams. Now. Dead and gone. Enough, that’s enough. Now the bandages. Pads and then wrap, and make it tight, I’ll be bleeding.”
“有些有，有些没有。”欧莎将淡红色的火奶倒在长长的伤口上，鲁温吸了口气。“森林之子能告诉你关于梦的知识。”
“Old Nan says the children knew the songs of the trees, that they could fly like birds and swim like fish and talk to the animals,” Bran said. “She says that they made music so beautiful that it made you cry like a little baby just to hear it.”
老师傅疼得眼泪都流了下来，但他仍旧固执地摇摇头。“森林之子……本身就只存在于梦中。他们早已灭亡、消失。够了，这样就够了，现在把绷带拿来。先垫棉花，再裹绷带，绑紧一点，我大概还会流不少血。”
“And all this they did with magic,” Maester Luwin said, distracted. “I wish they were here now. A spell would heal my arm less painfully, and they could talk to Shaggy dog and tell him not to bite.” He gave the big black wolf an angry glance out of the corner of his eye. “Take a lesson, Bran. The man who trusts in spells is dueling with a glass sword. As the children did. Here, let me show you something.” He stood abruptly, crossed the room, and returned with a green jar in his good hand. “Have a look at these,” he said as he pulled the stopper and shook out a handful of shiny black arrowheads.
“老奶妈说森林之子懂得树木的歌谣，会说动物的语言。他们能像鸟一样飞翔，像鱼一般游泳。”布兰说，“她说他们的音乐很美，光是听到就会让你像婴儿一样哭泣。”
Bran picked one up. “It’s made of glass.” Curious, Rickon drifted closer to peer over the table.
“他们是靠魔法才办到的，”鲁温师傅有些心不在焉地说，“我真希望他们还在。如果有魔法，我的手就不用痛得这么厉害，他们也可以跟毛毛狗沟通，叫它别乱咬人。”他愤怒地瞟了一眼那头大黑狼。“布兰，你要记好，不能相信魔法，否则就会做出拿玻璃剑和人打架的蠢事。森林之子正是如此。来，让我给你看件东西。”他突然起身，穿过房间，回来之时，没受伤的手里多了个绿罐子。“你看看这些。”说着他打开瓶盖，倒出几个闪亮的黑箭头。
“Dragonglass,” Osha named it as she sat down beside Luwin, bandagings in hand.
布兰拾起一个。“这是玻璃做的。”瑞肯也好奇地靠过来，朝桌上看。
“Obsidian,” Maester Luwin insisted, holding out his wounded arm. “Forged in the fires of the gods, far below the earth. The children of the forest hunted with that, thousands of years ago. The children worked no metal. In place of mail, they wore long shirts of woven leaves and bound their legs in bark, so they seemed to melt into the wood. In place of swords, they carried blades of obsidian.”
“这种玻璃叫龙晶。”欧莎道。她手拿绷带，在鲁温身边坐下。
“And still do.” Osha placed soft pads over the bites on the maester’s forearm and bound them tight with long strips of linen.
“学名是黑曜石。”鲁温澄清，一边挺起受伤的手臂。“这种物质是在地心深处，用诸神之火锻造而成。几千年前，森林之子便是用黑曜石打猎，因为他们不懂冶炼金属。他们以树叶编织的衣服代替盔甲，用树皮充作绑腿，所以看起来仿佛与森林融为一体。他们的飞箭和刀刃都是黑曜石做的。”
Bran held the arrowhead up close. The black glass was slick and shiny. He thought it beautiful. “Can I keep one?”
“现在也依旧如此。”欧莎把一块软垫布盖在学士的前臂伤口，然后用长长的棉绷带扎紧。
“As you wish,” the maester said.
布兰把箭头拿近细看，黑色的玻璃又滑又亮，他觉得好漂亮。“可以给我一个么？”
“I want one too,” Rickon said. “I want four. I’m four.”
“你就拿去吧。”老师傅说。
Luwin made him count them out. “Careful, they’re still sharp. Don’t cut yourself.”
“我也要，”瑞肯说，“我要四个，因为我四岁。”
“Tell me about the children,” Bran said. It was important.
鲁温要他算清楚了。“小心，它们依然很锋利，可别割伤自己。”
“What do you wish to know?”
“告诉我森林之子的事。”布兰说。这很重要。
“Everything.”
“你想知道哪方面的事呢？”
Maester Luwin tugged at his chain collar where it chafed against his neck. “They were people of the Dawn Age, the very first, before kings and kingdoms,” he said. “In those days, there were no castles or holdfasts, no cities, not so much as a market town to be found between here and the sea of Dorne. There were no men at all. Only the children of the forest dwelt in the lands we now call the Seven Kingdoms.
“每个方面我都想知道。”
“They were a people dark and beautiful, small of stature, no taller than children even when grown to manhood. They lived in the depths of the wood, in caves and crannogs and secret tree towns. Slight as they were, the children were quick and graceful. Male and female hunted together, with weirwood bows and flying snares. Their gods were the gods of the forest, stream, and stone, the old gods whose names are secret. Their wise men were called greenseers , and carved strange faces in the weirwoods to keep watch on the woods. How long the children reigned here or where they came from, no man can know.
鲁温师傅拉拉颈链。“他们是生活在黎明之纪元的族群，是世界最初的统治者，远在国王和王国出现之前。”他说，“那时没有城堡，没有村庄，也没有城市，从这里到多恩海，连半个市集都没有。当时没有人类存在，只有森林之子居住在这片我们称之为七大王国的土地上。”
“But some twelve thousand years ago, the First Men appeared from the east, crossing the Broken Arm of Dorne before it was broken. They came with bronze swords and great leathern shields, riding horses. No horse had ever been seen on this side of the narrow sea. No doubt the children were as frightened by the horses as the First Men were by the faces in the trees. As the First Men carved out holdfasts and farms, they cut down the faces and gave them to the fire. Horror-struck, the children went to war. The old songs say that the greenseers used dark magics to make the seas rise and sweep away the land, shattering the Arm, but it was too late to close the door. The wars went on until the earth ran red with blood of men and children both, but more children than men, for men were bigger and stronger, and wood and stone and obsidian make a poor match for bronze. Finally the wise of both races prevailed, and the chiefs and heroes of the First Men met the greenseers and wood dancers amidst the weirwood groves of a small island in the great lake called Gods Eye.
“他们是一支黝黑而美丽的民族，身材矮小，即使成年人的身高也和我们的小孩子差不多。他们居住于森林深处、洞穴、泽地岛屿和秘密的树上城镇。虽然个子小，森林之子却行动敏捷而优雅，不论男女均用鱼梁木制的弓箭和飞网狩猎。他们信仰属于森林、溪流和岩石的古老神明，这些神的名字都是秘密。他们的智者称为‘绿先知’，绿先知在鱼梁木上刻画奇怪的脸孔，藉以守护森林。森林之子究竟在此统治了多久，或是他们来自何方，没有人知道。”
“There they forged the Pact. The First Men were given the coastlands, the high plains and bright meadows, the mountains and bogs, but the deep woods were to remain forever the children’s, and no more weirwoods were to be put to the axe anywhere in the realm. So the gods might bear witness to the signing, every tree on the island was given a face, and afterward, the sacred order of green men was formed to keep watch over the Isle of Faces.
“大约一万两千年前，‘先民’出现了，他们通过当时还没断裂的多恩断臂角自东方跨海而来。先民骑着马，带着青铜宝剑和皮革巨盾。狭海这边的生物还没有见过马匹，森林之子对他们的马儿，想必和他们对树上刻画的脸同样感到害怕吧。当先民建造房舍和农田时，他们把有脸的树砍下来当柴烧。惊骇万分的森林之子，随即与他们开战。古老的歌谣传说绿先知施展强力魔法，使海平面上升，横扫陆地，粉碎了多恩之臂，然而为时已晚。战争持续下去，直到人类和森林之子的鲜血染红大地。因为人类更加高大强壮，木材、石头和黑曜石又无法与青铜匹敌，所以森林之子死伤惨重。终于，双方的有识之士提议讲和，于是先民的酋长、英雄，以及森林之子的绿先知和木舞者来到神眼湖中的小岛，在岛上的鱼梁木森林间会面。”
“The Pact began four thousand years of friendship between men and children. In time, the First Men even put aside the gods they had brought with them, and took up the worship of the secret gods of the wood. The signing of the Pact ended the Dawn Age, and began the Age of Heroes.”
“他们在那里订立了‘盟誓’，规定先民拥有海岸、平原、草原、山脉和沼泽，但繁茂的大森林永远归森林之子所有，而王国全境也不准再砍伐任何一棵鱼梁木。为使天上诸神见证此神圣盟誓，他们为岛上每一棵树都刻了脸，并在此成立‘绿人’的神圣组织，专司看守千面屿。”
Bran’s fist curled around the shiny black arrowhead. “But the children of the forest are all gone now, you said.”
“‘盟誓’开始了人类与森林之子间四千年的友谊，到后来，先民甚至抛弃了他们从东方带来的信仰，改而崇拜森林之子的神秘诸神。盟誓的签署结束了黎明之纪元，开始了英雄之纪元。”
“Here, they are,” said Osha, as she bit off the end of the last bandage with her teeth. “North of the Wall, things are different. That’s where the children went, and the giants, and the other old races.”
布兰的手掌，紧紧握住闪亮的黑箭头。“可你说森林之子已经灭绝了。”
Maester Luwin sighed. “Woman, by rights you ought to be dead or in chains. The Starks have treated you more gently than you deserve. It is unkind to repay them for their kindness by filling the boys’ heads with folly.”
“在这里，他们是灭绝了，”欧莎一边说，一边用牙齿咬断绷带末端。“长城以北可就不一样。森林之子、巨人还有其他古老的民族就是到那儿去啦。”
“Tell me where they went,” Bran said. “I want to know.”
鲁温师傅叹道：“女人，照理说你应该被处以死刑或至少披枷戴锁。史塔克家族给你的待遇，远超过你所应得的。他们对你这么好，你却把这孩子的脑袋里装满荒唐思想，实在是太忘恩负义了。”
“Me too,” Rickon echoed.
“跟我说嘛，他们到哪里去了？”布兰说，“我想知道。”
“Oh, very well,” Luwin muttered. “So long as the kingdoms of the First Men held sway, the Pact endured, all through the Age of Heroes and the Long Night and the birth of the Seven Kingdoms, yet finally there came a time, many centuries later, when other peoples crossed the narrow sea.
“我也是。”瑞肯应和。
“The Andals were the first, a race of tall, fair-haired warriors who came with steel and fire and the seven-pointed star of the new gods painted on their chests. The wars lasted hundreds of years, but in the end the six southron kingdoms all fell before them. Only here, where the King in the North threw back every army that tried to cross the Neck, did the rule of the First Men endure. The Andals burnt out the weirwood groves, hacked down the faces, slaughtered the children where they found them, and everywhere proclaimed the triumph of the Seven over the old gods. So the children fled north—”
“唉，好罢。”鲁温喃喃道，“只要先民的国度还在，‘盟誓’便仍有效力，经过英雄之纪元、长夜和七大王国的诞生，许多个世纪之后，其他的民族也终于渡海而来。”
Summer began to howl.
“最先来到的是高大金发的安达尔战士。约从千年前，他们带着精钢打造的武器，胸膛画了象征新神的七芒星，渡海杀来。先民和他们的战争持续了数百年，六个南方王国一个接一个落入他们手中。只有在这里，冬境之王击败了所有试图穿越颈泽的军队；也只有在这里，先民依旧占有一席之地。安达尔人烧毁了所有的鱼梁木丛林，砍倒人面树，一遇森林之子便肆意捕杀，所到之处均大力倡导七神信仰，贬抑远古诸神。于是森林之子纷纷向北逃亡——”
Maester Luwin broke off, startled. When Shaggydog bounded to his feet and added his voice to his brother’s, dread clutched at Bran’s heart. “It’s coming,” he whispered, with the certainty of despair. He had known it since last night, he realized, since the crow had led him down into the crypts to say farewell. He had known it, but he had not believed. He had wanted Maester Luwin to be right. The crow , he thought, the three-eyed crow …
夏天仰天长嚎。
The howling stopped as suddenly as it had begun. Summer padded across the tower floor to Shaggydog, and began to lick at a mat of bloody fur on the back of his brother’s neck. From the window came a flutter of wings.
鲁温师傅吓了一跳，停住讲话。毛毛狗随即跳起来，加入兄弟的长吼，布兰心中充满恐惧。“它来了。”他小声说，语气中有种肯定的绝望。他突然明白，自己从昨天晚上便已知道，因为三眼乌鸦带他到墓窖去道别。他虽然知道，却不肯相信，只下意识地希望鲁温师傅说得没错。那只乌鸦，他心想，那只三眼乌鸦……
A raven landed on the grey stone sill, opened its beak, and gave a harsh, raucous rattle of distress.
狼嚎才刚开始，便告结束。夏天穿过房间，走到毛毛狗身边，开始舔舐弟弟颈背干涸的血块。窗边传来翅膀拍打的声音。
Rickon began to cry. His arrowheads fell from his hand one by one and clattered on the floor. Bran pulled him close and hugged him.
一只渡鸦降落在灰石窗棂上，张开鸟喙，发出一声尖锐、粗哑而痛苦的哀鸣。
Maester Luwin stared at the black bird as if it were a scorpion with feathers. He rose, slow as a sleepwalker, and moved to the window. When he whistled, the raven hopped onto his bandaged forearm. There was dried blood on its wings. “A hawk,” Luwin murmured, “perhaps an owl. Poor thing, a wonder it got through.” He took the letter from its leg.
瑞肯哭了，箭头从他手中一个又一个地滑落，坠地，叮当作响。布兰把他拉过来，紧紧搂住他。
Bran found himself shivering as the maester unrolled the paper. “What is it?” he said, holding his brother all the harder.
鲁温师傅怔怔地望着黑鸟，仿佛它是生了羽毛的毒蝎。他站起身，动作缓慢，宛如梦游般地走向窗边。当他轻吹口哨，渡鸦便跳上他缠着绷带的前臂。鸟儿翅膀上有干掉的血迹。“一定是猎鹰，”鲁温喃喃自语：“或者是夜枭。可怜的家伙，它能活着抵达真是奇迹。”他取下鸟儿脚上的信。
“You know what it is, boy,” Osha said, not unkindly. She put her hand on his head.
眼看学士展开信纸，布兰发现自己止不住颤抖。“信上说什么？”他问，同时更用力地抱紧弟弟。
Maester Luwin looked up at them numbly, a small grey man with blood on the sleeve of his grey wool robe and tears in his bright grey eyes. “My lords,” he said to the sons, in a voice gone hoarse and shrunken, “we … we shall need to find a stonecarver who knew his likeness well …”
“小子，你已经知道是什么了。”欧莎说，话中并无恶意。她伸手摸摸他的头。
*SANSA
鲁温师傅抬起头，木然地看着他们。这位身材瘦小，灰衣灰发的老人，长袍袖子上沾满血迹，明亮的灰色眼瞳里泪光晶莹。“大人，”他用一种整个沙哑掉、干瘪掉的声音，对公爵的两个儿子说，“我们……我们得找个熟悉他容貌的雕刻师父了……”
I n the tower room at the heart of Maegor’s Holdfast, Sansa gave herself to the darkness.
第六十八章 珊莎
She drew the curtains around her bed, slept, woke weeping, and slept again. When she could not sleep she lay under her blankets shivering with grief. Servants came and went, bringing meals, but the sight of food was more than she could bear. The dishes piled up on the table beneath her window, untouched and spoiling, until the servants took them away again.
在梅葛楼深处的高塔房间里，珊莎将自己彻底投入黑暗。
Sometimes her sleep was leaden and dreamless, and she woke from it more tired than when she had closed her eyes. Yet those were the best times, for when she dreamed, she dreamed of Father. Waking or sleeping, she saw him, saw the gold cloaks fling him down, saw Ser Ilyn striding forward, unsheathing Ice from the scabbard on his back, saw the moment … the moment when … she had wanted to look away, she had wanted to, her legs had gone out from under her and she had fallen to her knees, yet somehow she could not turn her head, and all the people were screaming and shouting, and her prince had smiled at her, he’d smiled and she’d felt safe, but only for a heartbeat, until he said those words, and her father’s legs … that was what she remembered, his legs, the way they’d jerked when Ser Ilyn … when the sword …
她拉上床帘，昏沉沉地睡去，醒了便哭，哭累再睡。睡不着的时候，她蜷缩在被窝里，哀恸欲绝，颤抖不已。仆人们来了又去，为她送来一日三餐，但她一见食物就无法忍受。于是一碟碟碰都没碰的饭菜在窗边桌上越堆越高，直到后来发酸发臭，仆人将之收走为止。
Perhaps I will die too , she told herself, and the thought did not seem so terrible to her. If she flung herself from the window, she could put an end to her suffering, and in the years to come the singers would write songs of her grief. Her body would lie on the stones below, broken and innocent, shaming all those who had betrayed her. Sansa went so far as to cross the bedchamber and throw open the shutters … but then her courage left her, and she ran back to her bed, sobbing.
有时候她的睡眠沉重如铅，整夜无梦，等醒来精疲力竭，甚至较合眼时更累。但那还算好的，因为她若是做梦，必定与父亲有关。或睡或醒，她眼中所见都只有他被金袍卫士按倒在地的景象，伊林爵士大跨步向他走去，一边从背上的剑鞘里抽出“寒冰”，然后……然后……当时她只想把头转开，她真的好想把头转开，但她的双脚早已绵软无力，于是她跪倒在地。而不知怎地，她就是无法别过头去。四周的人大吼大叫，她的白马王子刚才不是对她露出微笑么？他真的笑了，她以为一切都没事了，但只有一瞬间，接着他便说了那句话。父亲的脚……她只记得他的双脚猛烈抽搐了一下……当伊林爵士……当他的剑……
The serving girls tried to talk to her when they brought her meals, but she never answered them. Once Grand Maester Pycelle came with a box of flasks and bottles, to ask if she was ill. He felt her brow, made her undress, and touched her all over while her bedmaid held her down. When he left he gave her a potion of honeywater and herbs and told her to drink a swallow every night. She drank it all right then and went back to sleep.
我也死了算了，她对自己说，她发现这个念头一点也不可怕。假如她从窗户纵身跳下，便可结束一切苦难，多年以后，吟游诗人会歌颂她的悲伤。她将支离破碎地倒在塔下的石板上，纯洁无瑕，令所有背叛她的人均感羞愧。珊莎几度穿过卧室，敞开窗扉……但勇气就在那时离她而去，她只能哭着跑回床上。
She dreamt of footsteps on the tower stair, an ominous scraping of leather on stone as a man climbed slowly toward her bedchamber, step by step. All she could do was huddle behind her door and listen, trembling, as he came closer and closer. It was Ser Ilyn Payne, she knew, coming for her with Ice in his hand, coming to take her head. There was no place to run, no place to hide, no way to bar the door. Finally the footsteps stopped and she knew he was just outside, standing there silent with his dead eyes and his long pocked face. That was when she realized she was naked. She crouched down, trying to cover herself with her hands, as her door began to swing open, creaking, the point of the greatsword poking through …
女侍送饭来时，曾试着和她说话，但她一概置之不理。有次，派席尔大学士带着一箱瓶瓶罐罐前来，询问她是否病了。他摸摸她的额头，命她宽衣，要女侍按住她手脚，他则摸遍她全身上下。临走时他留给她一罐蜂蜜和药草调成的药水，叮嘱她每晚喝一小口。她乖乖照办，然后倒头再睡。
She woke murmuring, “Please, please, I’ll be good, I’ll be good , please don’t,” but there was no one to hear.
她梦见高塔楼梯上传来脚步声，一种皮革与石头摩擦的不祥之声。有人正一步一步缓缓朝她卧室走来。她所能做的只有蜷缩门后，不住地发抖，听他越来越近。她很清楚那一定是手握“寒冰”的伊林·派恩爵士，准备来取她首级。但她无路可逃，无处可躲，无法将门闩上。最后脚步声总算停了下来，她知道他就站在门外，一言不发，长长的麻子脸，一双死人眼。这时她才发觉自己浑身赤裸，赶紧趴在地上，用手遮掩身体。门缓缓打开，嘎吱作响，巨剑的尖端穿刺而进……
When they finally came for her in truth, Sansa never heard their footsteps. It was Joffrey who opened her door, not Ser Ilyn but the boy who had been her prince. She was in bed, curled up tight, her curtains drawn, and she could not have said if it was noon or midnight. The first thing she heard was the slam of the door. Then her bed hangings were yanked back, and she threw up a hand against the sudden light and saw them standing over her.
她醒来之时，嘴里还不住念叨：“求求你，求求你，我很乖的，我会听话，请你不要杀我。”但没人理会她。
“You will attend me in court this afternoon,” Joffrey said. “See that you bathe and dress as befits my betrothed.” Sandor Clegane stood at his shoulder in a plain brown doublet and green mantle, his burned face hideous in the morning light. Behind them were two knights of the Kingsguard in long white satin cloaks.
等他们当真找上门的时候，珊莎却没听见脚步声。开门的并非伊林爵士，而是她曾经的白马王子乔佛里。她正在床上，缩成一团，由于床帘紧闭，分不清中午还是午夜。她首先听见门轰然摔开，紧接着帷帐被猛地扯开，她赶忙伸手，遮挡突现的强光，发现他们高高地站在床边。
Sansa drew her blanket up to her chin to cover herself. “No,” she whimpered, “please … leave me be.”
“今天下午你要跟我上朝，”乔佛里道，“快去洗澡，换衣服，打扮得有点我未婚妻的样子。”桑铎·克里冈站在他身旁，穿着一件式样简单的褐色外衣，绿色披风，那张烧烂的脸在晨光中更显狰狞。站在二人之后的是两名御林铁卫，肩披长长的雪白锦缎披风。
“If you won’t rise and dress yourself, my Hound will do it for you,” Joffrey said.
珊莎把毯子拉至下巴，遮住身子。“不要，”她哀求，“请……请放过我吧。”
“I beg of you, my prince …”
“你不赶紧起来换衣服，我就叫我的狗帮你换。”乔佛里说。
“I’m king now. Dog, get her out of bed.”
“求求您，我的王子……”
Sandor Clegane scooped her up around the waist and lifted her off the featherbed as she struggled feebly. Her blanket fell to the floor. Underneath she had only a thin bedgown to cover her nakedness. “Do as you’re bid, child,” Clegane said. “Dress.” He pushed her toward her wardrobe, almost gently.
“我是国王。狗，把她拖下来。”
Sansa backed away from them. “I did as the queen asked, I wrote the letters, I wrote what she told me. You promised you’d be merciful. Please, let me go home. I won’t do any treason, I’ll be good, I swear it, I don’t have traitor’s blood, I don’t . I only want to go home.” Remembering her courtesies, she lowered her head. “As it please you,” she finished weakly.
桑铎·克里冈抓住她的手腕，将她自羽毛床上拎起来，任她虚弱的挣扎。毯子滑落地面，她只穿了一件薄薄的睡袍。“孩子，照他的话去做，”克里冈说，“快把衣服穿上。”他把她推向衣柜，动作竟有些温柔。
“It does not please me,” Joffrey said. “Mother says I’m still to marry you, so you’ll stay here, and you’ll obey.”
珊莎推开他们。“我照王后的要求做了，写了信，内容也都是照她的话写的。您答应我会手下留情。求求您，让我回家吧。我不会背叛你的，我会很乖、很听话，我发誓。我体内没有叛徒的血统，真的没有。我只是想回家。”想起应该注重礼节，她垂下头。“如果您高兴的话，”她有气无力地说。
“I don’t want to marry you,” Sansa wailed. “You chopped off my father’s head!”
“我一点也不高兴。”乔佛里道，“母亲说我还是得娶你，所以你必须留在这里，而且要乖乖听话。”
“He was a traitor. I never promised to spare him, only that I’d be merciful, and I was. If he hadn’t been your father, I would have had him torn or flayed, but I gave him a clean death.”
“我不想嫁给你，”珊莎悲泣着说，“你砍了我父亲的头！”
Sansa stared at him, seeing him for the first time. He was wearing a padded crimson doublet patterned with lions and a cloth-of-gold cape with a high collar that framed his face. She wondered how she could ever have thought him handsome. His lips were as soft and red as the worms you found after a rain, and his eyes were vain and cruel. “I hate you,” she whispered.
“他是个叛徒，我从没答应饶他一命，只说会手下留情，我也真的手下留情了。他要不是你父亲，我会把他分尸剥皮，但我却让他死得干脆。”
King Joffrey’s face hardened. “My mother tells me that it isn’t fitting that a king should strike his wife. Ser Meryn.”
珊莎怔怔地望着他，这才头一次把他瞧了个清楚。他穿着绣满狮子的加衬鲜红外衣，金缕披风，高领搭配着他那张脸。她不禁纳闷自己怎么会觉得他英俊潇洒？他的嘴唇又红又软，活像雨后土中翻到的蠕虫，他的双眼则是虚妄又残忍。“我恨你。”她低声说。
The knight was on her before she could think, yanking back her hand as she tried to shield her face and back-handing her across the ear with a gloved fist. Sansa did not remember falling, yet the next she knew she was sprawled on one knee amongst the rushes. Her head was ringing. Ser Meryn Trant stood over her, with blood on the knuckles of his white silk glove.
乔佛里国王脸色一凛。“母亲说国王不应该动手打妻子。马林爵士。”
“Will you obey now, or shall I have him chastise you again?”
她还不及反应，骑士便已拉开她试图遮脸的手，掐起重拳甩了她一记耳光。珊莎不记得自己跌倒，但等她回过神来，已经单膝跪倒在草席上，头晕目眩。马林·特兰爵士矗立在她上方，白丝手套指节处有血迹。
Sansa’s ear felt numb. She touched it, and her fingertips came away wet and red. “I … as … as you command, my lord.”
“你是乖乖听话，还是要我再让他教训你一次？”
“Your Grace,” Joffrey corrected her. “I shall look for you in court.” He turned and left.
珊莎的耳朵没了知觉，她伸手一摸，指尖湿湿的都是血。“我……听候您差遣，大人。”
Ser Meryn and Ser Arys followed him out, but Sandor Clegane lingered long enough to yank her roughly to her feet. “Save yourself some pain, girl, and give him what he wants.”
“是‘陛下’。”乔佛里纠正她，“等会儿朝廷上见。”说完他转身离去。
“What … what does he want? Please, tell me.”
马林爵士和亚历斯爵士随他离开，但桑铎·克里冈粗略地拉了她一把，提她起来。“小妹妹，为你自己好，照他的想法去做。”
“He wants you to smile and smell sweet and be his lady love,” the Hound rasped. “He wants to hear you recite all your pretty little words the way the septa taught you. He wants you to love him … and fear him.”
“他……他想怎么样？求求您，告诉我吧。”
After he was gone, Sansa sank back onto the rushes, staring at the wall until two of her bedmaids crept timidly into the chamber. “I will need hot water for my bath, please,” she told them, “and perfume, and some powder to hide this bruise.” The right side of her face was swollen and beginning to ache, but she knew Joffrey would want her to be beautiful.
“他想看你笑容可掬，浑身香气，当他的美丽未婚妻。”猎狗嘶声道，“他想听你背诵那套漂亮话语，就跟修女教你的一样。他想要你既爱他……又怕他。”
The hot water made her think of Winterfell, and she took strength from that. She had not washed since the day her father died, and she was startled at how filthy the water became. Her maids sluiced the blood off her face, scrubbed the dirt from her back, washed her hair and brushed it out until it sprang back in thick auburn curls. Sansa did not speak to them, except to give them commands; they were Lannister servants, not her own, and she did not trust them. When the time came to dress, she chose the green silk gown that she had worn to the tourney. She recalled how gallant Joff had been to her that night at the feast. Perhaps it would make him remember as well, and treat her more gently.
他走之后，珊莎立刻又软倒在草席上，怔怔地望着墙壁出神，直到两个女侍怯怯地走进房间。“我需要沐浴，请帮我准备热水。”她告诉她们，“还有香水，以及妆粉，好遮住淤伤。”她的右半边脸整个肿了起来，隐隐作痛，但她知道乔佛里希望她打扮得漂漂亮亮的。
She drank a glass of buttermilk and nibbled at some sweet biscuits as she waited, to settle her stomach. It was midday when Ser Meryn returned. He had donned his white armor; a shirt of enameled scales chased with gold, a tall helm with a golden sunburst crest, greaves and gorget and gauntlet and boots of gleaming plate, a heavy wool cloak clasped with a golden lion. His visor had been removed from his helm, to better show his dour face; pouchy bags under his eyes, a wide sour mouth, rusty hair spotted with grey. “My lady,” he said, bowing, as if he had not beaten her bloody only three hours past. “His Grace has instructed me to escort you to the throne room.”
热水，令她想起了临冬城，稍稍坚强起来。自从父亲死后，她就没洗过澡，这时才惊讶地发现水变得多脏。女仆为她洗去脸上的血污，刷净背上的尘土，将浆洗的头发梳成浓密的枣红发卷。除了下令，珊莎不和她们交谈：她们是兰尼斯特家的仆人，不是她自家的人，她不信任她们。穿衣服时，她特地拣了那件绿丝礼服，正是比武大会当天穿的那件。她记得那晚席间乔佛里对她有多殷勤，如果她穿上这件衣服，或许能让他联想起来，对她温柔一点。
“Did he instruct you to hit me if I refused to come?”
打扮完毕后，她坐下等待，喝了一杯酪乳，啃下几块甜饼干，暂时止住胃里的翻腾。到马林爵士来找她时，已经日当正午。他穿上了全套纯白甲胄：精工金线白鳞甲，高顶黄金日芒盔，护膝、护喉、护手和长靴都是闪闪发光的铁铠，还有一袭厚重的羊毛披风，装饰着黄金狮扣。他的头盔除去了面罩，显露出冷峻的脸；两个大眼袋，一张宽阔而乖戾的嘴，铁锈般的头发里夹杂着几许灰白。“小姐，”他鞠躬道，仿佛不记得自己三小时前把她打得满脸是血。“陛下吩咐我护送您上朝。”
“Are you refusing to come, my lady?” The look he gave her was without expression. He did not so much as glance at the bruise he had left her.
“如果我拒绝，他有没有吩咐你打我啊？”
He did not hate her, Sansa realized; neither did he love her. He felt nothing for her at all. She was only a … a thing to him. “No,” she said, rising. She wanted to rage, to hurt him as he’d hurt her, to warn him that when she was queen she would have him exiled if he ever dared strike her again … but she remembered what the Hound had told her, so all she said was, “I shall do whatever His Grace commands.”
“小姐，您这是在拒绝么？”他看她的眼神毫无感情，对他稍早造成的淤伤无动于衷。
“As I do,” he replied.
珊莎突然明白，他并不恨她，也不爱她，他对她根本一点感觉也没有。对他来说，她不过是个……东西。“不是，”她说罢起身，心中好想疯狂发怒，狠狠地揍他，就像他打她一样，她要警告他，等她当上王后，他若再敢动她一根汗毛，便将他永世放逐……但她心中依然记得猎狗的话，所以她只说：“我将谨遵陛下的旨意。”
“Yes … but you are no true knight, Ser Meryn.”
“我也是。”他回答。
Sandor Clegane would have laughed at that, Sansa knew. Other men might have cursed her, warned her to keep silent, even begged for her forgiveness. Ser Meryn Trant did none of these. Ser Meryn Trant simply did not care.
“是么……可是，马林爵士，你不是真正的骑士。”
The balcony was deserted save for Sansa. She stood with her head bowed, fighting to hold back her tears, while below Joffrey sat on his Iron Throne and dispensed what it pleased him to call justice. Nine cases out of ten seemed to bore him; those he allowed his council to handle, squirming restlessly while Lord Baelish, Grand Maester Pycelle, or Queen Cersei resolved the matter. When he did choose to make a ruling, though, not even his queen mother could sway him.
珊莎知道，桑铎·克里冈若是听了这话，准会哈哈大笑。换做其他人，或许会咒骂她，或许会警告她闭嘴，甚或恳求她原谅，但马林·特兰爵士什么也没做，因为他根本不在乎。
A thief was brought before him and he had Ser Ilyn chop his hand off, right there in court. Two knights came to him with a dispute about some land, and he decreed that they should duel for it on the morrow. “To the death,” he added. A woman fell to her knees to plead for the head of a man executed as a traitor. She had loved him, she said, and she wanted to see him decently buried. “If you loved a traitor, you must be a traitor too,” Joffrey said. Two gold cloaks dragged her off to the dungeons.
除了珊莎，供旁听的楼台上空无一人。她低着头，强忍泪水，看着下面的乔佛里端坐铁王座，自以为公义地裁决国事。十件案子，有九件他觉得无聊，便把它们统统交给御前会议，自己则在宝座上焦躁不安地动来动去。贝里席伯爵、派席尔大学士和瑟曦太后忙个不停，但当国王偶而决定亲自出马时，连他的母后大人也左右不了局面。
Frog-faced Lord Slynt sat at the end of the council table wearing a black velvet doublet and a shiny cloth-of-gold cape, nodding with approval every time the king pronounced a sentence. Sansa stared hard at his ugly face, remembering how he had thrown down her father for Ser Ilyn to behead, wishing she could hurt him, wishing that some hero would throw him down and cut off his head. But a voice inside her whispered, There are no heroes , and she remembered what Lord Petyr had said to her, here in this very hall. “Life is not a song, sweetling,” he’d told her. “You may learn that one day to your sorrow.” In life, the monsters win , she told herself, and now it was the Hound’s voice she heard, a cold rasp, metal on stone. “Save yourself some pain, girl, and give him what he wants.”
有个小偷被拖上来，他吩咐伊林爵士在王座厅里当场剁下他的手。两名骑士对某块地产生纷争，上朝请他定夺，他则下诏令他们明日决斗解决，并且补上一句：“至死方休。”有个女人跪地乞求一位因叛国罪而被砍头的男子的首级，她说她很爱他，希望能让他全尸下葬。“你爱叛徒，说明你也是叛徒。”乔佛里说，于是两个金袍卫士把她拖进地牢。
The last case was a plump tavern singer, accused of making a song that ridiculed the late King Robert. Joff commanded them to fetch his woodharp and ordered him to perform the song for the court. The singer wept and swore he would never sing that song again, but the king insisted. It was sort of a funny song, all about Robert fighting with a pig. The pig was the boar who’d killed him, Sansa knew, but in some verses it almost sounded as if he were singing about the queen. When the song was done, Joffrey announced that he’d decided to be merciful. The singer could keep either his fingers or his tongue. He would have a day to make his choice. Janos Slynt nodded.
生着一张青蛙脸的史林特伯爵坐在议事桌末端，身穿黑天鹅绒外衣，肩披闪亮的金缕披风，国王每下一个判决，他就点头称是。珊莎仔细地看着他那张丑脸，想起他当时如何把父亲按倒在地，让伊林爵士斩首示众，心中只盼能狠狠地报复他，希望哪个英雄能把“他”也按倒在地，斩首示众。但在她心底，有个声音却在低语：世上已经没有英雄了。她忆起培提尔伯爵从前在这个大厅里对她说的话，“小可爱，人生不比歌谣，”他告诉她，“有朝一日，你可能会大失所望。”看来在现实生活中，往往是怪兽得胜，她对自己说，接着她耳边又回响起猎狗那如金属和石头摩擦的冰冷嘶声：“小妹妹，为你自己好，照他想法去做。”
That was the final business of the afternoon, Sansa saw with relief, but her ordeal was not yet done. When the herald’s voice dismissed the court, she fled the balcony, only to find Joffrey waiting for her at the base of the curving stairs. The Hound was with him, and Ser Meryn as well. The young king examined her critically, top to bottom. “You look much better than you did.”
最后一件案子的被告是一位肥胖的酒店歌手，他被控谱曲嘲弄故王劳勃。乔佛里派人把他的木竖琴拿来，命令他当场表演给所有人听。歌手泪流满面，发誓再也不会唱这首歌了，但国王坚持要他唱。歌词其实挺有趣，大致是描述劳勃和猪打架。珊莎知道，那头猪就是杀死国王的野猪，但歌中的某些小节却像在影射太后。唱完之后，乔佛里宣布他将网开一面，歌手可以选择保留手指或者舌头，他有一天的时间来决定。杰诺斯·史林特点头称许。
“Thank you, Your Grace,” Sansa said. Hollow words, but they made him nod and smile.
下午的朝政总算告一段落，珊莎松了口气，但她的苦难却没有结束。司仪宣布退朝后，她急忙逃离旁听台，谁料乔佛里正在蜿蜒的楼梯下等她，猎狗和马林爵士在他身边。年轻的国王从上到下，仔细地审视着她。“你看起来比先前漂亮多了。”
“Walk with me,” Joffrey commanded, offering her his arm. She had no choice but to take it. The touch of his hand would have thrilled her once; now it made her flesh crawl. “My name day will be here soon,” Joffrey said as they slipped out the rear of the throne room. “There will be a great feast, and gifts. What are you going to give me?”
“多谢陛下称赞。”珊莎说。虽是违心之论，他听了却点头微笑。
“I … I had not thought, my lord.”
“陪我散步吧。”乔佛里命令，一边伸出了手，她别无选择，只好挽着他。若是从前，摸到他的手会令她震颤不已，但如今她却浑身起了鸡皮疙瘩。“我的命名日快到了，”他们从王座厅后方离开时，乔佛里说，“我们将举办盛大的宴会，会有很多人送我礼物。你要送我什么？”
“Your Grace,” he said sharply. “You truly are a stupid girl, aren’t you? My mother says so.”
“我……我还没想好送什么，大人。”
“She does?” After all that had happened, his words should have lost their power to hurt her, yet somehow they had not. The queen had always been so kind to her.
“陛下，”他口气尖锐地说，“你真是个笨女孩，对不对？母亲早跟我说了。”
“Oh, yes. She worries about our children, whether they’ll be stupid like you, but I told her not to trouble herself.” The king gestured, and Ser Meryn opened a door for them.
“她真这么说？”经过这些日子以来的经历，她以为他的话已经失去了伤害她的力量，但是却不然。王后向来对她很好啊。
“Thank you, Your Grace,” she murmured. The Hound was right , she thought, I am only a little bird, repeating the words they taught me . The sun had fallen below the western wall, and the stones of the Red Keep glowed dark as blood.
“噢，当然是真的，她还担心我们的孩子会不会像你一样笨，不过我叫她别操心。”国王做个手势，马林爵士便为他们打开门。
“I’ll get you with child as soon as you’re able,” Joffrey said as he escorted her across the practice yard. “If the first one is stupid, I’ll chop off your head and find a smarter wife. When do you think you’ll be able to have children?”
“谢谢您，陛下。”她嗫嚅着说。猎狗说得没错，她心想，我是一只小小鸟，只会重复别人教我的话。夕阳已经落下西边的城墙，红堡的砖石在暮色中沉暗如血。
Sansa could not look at him, he shamed her so. “Septa Mordane says most … most highborn girls have their flowering at twelve or thirteen.”
“一旦你能生孩子，我就会让你怀孕，”乔佛里陪她走过练习场。“如果头胎是个笨蛋，我就立刻把你的头砍了，另外找个聪明的妻子。你什么时候才能生孩子啊？”
Joffrey nodded. “This way.” He led her into the gatehouse, to the base of the steps that led up to the battlements.
他把她羞辱成这样，珊莎无法正视他。“茉丹修女说多……多数的官家小姐在十二或十三岁的时候就会发育成熟。”
Sansa jerked back away from him, trembling. Suddenly she knew where they were going. “No,” she said, her voice a frightened gasp. “Please, no, don’t make me, I beg you …”
乔佛里点点头。“这边。”他领她进入红堡的城门塔，走到通往城垛的楼梯口。
Joffrey pressed his lips together. “I want to show you what happens to traitors.”
珊莎猛地从他身旁抽身，不住发抖，突然明白这是要去哪里。“不要，”她呼吸急促，语带恐慌。“求求你，不要这样，不要带我去，我求求你……”
Sansa shook her head wildly. “I won’t. I won’t.”
乔佛里抿紧嘴唇。“我要让你瞧瞧叛徒的下场！”
“I can have Ser Meryn drag you up,” he said. “You won’t like that. You had better do what I say.” Joffrey reached for her, and Sansa cringed away from him, backing into the Hound.
珊莎疯狂地摇头。“不，我不要去看。”
“Do it, girl,” Sandor Clegane told her, pushing her back toward the king. His mouth twitched on the burned side of his face and Sansa could almost hear the rest of it. He'll have you up there no matter what, so give him what he wants .
“我可以叫马林爵士拖你上去，”他说，“你不会喜欢的。你还是给我乖乖照办的好。”乔佛里朝她伸手，珊莎向后退开，结果撞上了猎狗。
She forced herself to take King Joffrey’s hand. The climb was something out of a nightmare; every step was a struggle, as if she were pulling her feet out of ankle-deep mud, and there were more steps than she would have believed, a thousand thousand steps, and horror waiting on the ramparts.
“小妹妹，听话。”桑铎·克里冈边说边把她推回给国王。他烧伤那边脸的嘴角抽搐了片刻，珊莎几乎可以听见他没说出来的话：无论如何他都会把你弄上去的，所以，照他想法去做吧。
From the high battlements of the gatehouse, the whole world spread out below them. Sansa could see the Great Sept of Baelor on Visenya’s hill, where her father had died. At the other end of the Street of the Sisters stood the fire-blackened ruins of the Dragonpit. To the west, the swollen red sun was half-hidden behind the Gate of the Gods. The salt sea was at her back, and to the south was the fish market and the docks and the swirling torrent of the Blackwater Rush. And to the north …
她强迫自己挽起乔佛里国王的手。登楼是一场噩梦，每一步都是挣扎，就像把脚从及膝的泥泞里抽出来那么困难。楼梯好似永无止尽，几千几万级，而梯顶的城墙上有无边恐惧正等着她。
She turned that way, and saw only the city, streets and alleys and hills and bottoms and more streets and more alleys and the stone of distant walls. Yet she knew that beyond them was open country, farms and fields and forests, and beyond that, north and north and north again, stood Winterfell.
从城门塔顶的城垛望去，整个世界摊在下方。珊莎可以看到座落于维桑尼亚丘陵上的贝勒大圣堂，父亲就是在那里被处死的。静默姐妹街的另一端，耸立着烧得焦黑的龙穴废墟。西边，红色的夕阳被诸神门遮掩了一半。在她身后，是咸海汪洋。南面有鱼市、码头和浩荡奔涌的黑水河，北面则有……
“What are you looking at?” Joffrey said. “This is what I wanted you to see, right here.”
她望向北方，只见城市、街道、巷弄、丘陵……更多的街道巷弄，以及远方的城墙。然而她知道，在这些尘世扰攘之外，是开阔的原野、农田和森林，在更北更北更北的地方，是临冬城，是家。
A thick stone parapet protected the outer edge of the rampart, reaching as high as Sansa’s chin, with crenellations cut into it every five feet for archers. The heads were mounted between the crenels, along the top of the wall, impaled on iron spikes so they faced out over the city. Sansa had noted them the moment she’d stepped out onto the wallwalk, but the river and the bustling streets and the setting sun were ever so much prettier. He can make me look at the heads , she told herself, but he can’t make me see them .
“你在看什么？”乔佛里道，“我要你看这个，这里。”
“This one is your father,” he said. “This one here. Dog, turn it around so she can see him.”
一堵厚厚的石砌胸墙环绕着壁垒外围，高及珊莎下巴，每隔五尺便有一个让弓箭手使用的雉堞。那些首级便位于城墙顶端的雉堞之间，插在铁枪尖端，面朝城市。珊莎踏上城墙的那一刻便注意到了，但河滨景致、熙来攘往的街道和落日余晖是那么的美。他可以逼我看，她告诉自己，但我可以视而不见。
Sandor Clegane took the head by the hair and turned it. The severed head had been dipped in tar to preserve it longer. Sansa looked at it calmly, not seeing it at all. It did not really look like Lord Eddard, she thought; it did not even look real . “How long do I have to look?”
“这个是你父亲，”他说，“这边这个。狗，把头转过来给她瞧。”
Joffrey seemed disappointed. “Do you want to see the rest?” There was a long row of them.
桑铎·克里冈伸手到半空中，把首级转了过来。砍下的头颅浸过沥青，如此才能保存得较长。珊莎冷静地看着父亲的首级，不动声色。这看起来不像艾德公爵，她心想，看起来不像真的。“请问，您要我看多久？”
“If it please Your Grace.”
乔佛里似乎大感失望。“你想不想看其他人的头？”城垛上有一大排。
Joffrey marched her down the wallwalk, past a dozen more heads and two empty spikes. “I’m saving those for my uncle Stannis and my uncle Renly,” he explained. The other heads had been dead and mounted much longer than her father. Despite the tar, most were long past being recognizable. The king pointed to one and said, “That’s your septa there,” but Sansa could not even have told that it was a woman. The jaw had rotted off her face, and birds had eaten one ear and most of a cheek.
“如果陛下您高兴的话。”
Sansa had wondered what had happened to Septa Mordane, although she supposed she had known all along. “Why did you kill her?” she asked. “She was god-sworn …”
于是乔佛里领她沿着走道前进，经过十几颗人头，还有两根空着的长枪。“这两根是我特地留给史坦尼斯叔叔和蓝礼叔叔的。”他解释。其他人死亡的时间比父亲长很多，首级待在枪尖上也久得多。虽然泡过沥青，但多数都变得难以辨认。国王指着其中一个说：“这个是你们家的修女。”可珊莎根本看不出那是女人的头。头颅的下巴已经整个烂掉，鸟儿吃掉了一只耳朵和大半边脸颊。
“She was a traitor.” Joffrey looked pouty; somehow she was upsetting him. “You haven’t said what you mean to give me for my name day. Maybe I should give you something instead, would you like that?”
珊莎之前还纳闷茉丹修女到底发生了什么，现在想来，或许她早就心里有数了罢。“您为什么杀她呀？”她问：“她只是个虔诚的……”
“If it please you, my lord,” Sansa said.
“她是个叛徒。”乔佛里看起来闷闷不乐，她似乎惹恼他了。“你还没决定送我什么命名日礼物。不然换我送你好了，你觉得怎么样？”
When he smiled, she knew he was mocking her. “Your brother is a traitor too, you know.” He turned Septa Mordane’s head back around. “I remember your brother from Winterfell. My dog called him the lord of the wooden sword. Didn’t you, dog?”
“如果您高兴的话，大人。”珊莎说。
“Did I?” the Hound replied. “I don’t recall.”
他一露出微笑，她便知道他在嘲讽自己。“你哥哥也是个叛徒，这你知道吧？”他把茉丹修女的头转回去。“我记得那次去临冬城见过你哥哥。我家的狗叫他玩木剑的少爷，对不对啊，好狗儿？”
Joffrey gave a petulant shrug. “Your brother defeated my uncle Jaime. My mother says it was treachery and deceit. She wept when she heard. Women are all weak, even her, though she pretends she isn’t. She says we need to stay in King’s Landing in case my other uncles attack, but I don’t care. After my name day feast, I’m going to raise a host and kill your brother myself. That’s what I’ll give you, Lady Sansa. Your brother’s head.”
“我这么说过？”猎狗回答，“我倒是不记得了。”
A kind of madness took over her then, and she heard herself say, “Maybe my brother will give me your head.”
乔佛里暴躁地耸耸肩。“你哥哥把我詹姆舅舅打败了。母亲说他是靠诡计和欺骗才得逞的。她接获消息时，马上哭了起来。女人都是软弱的动物，连她也不例外，虽然总是假装很坚强。她说我们必须留在君临，以防我的两个叔叔发动攻击，但我才不在乎。等过了我的命名日宴会，我就要召集一支军队，亲手把你哥哥杀掉。珊莎·史塔克，这就是我要给你的礼物，你哥哥的首级。”
Joffrey scowled. “You must never mock me like that. A true wife does not mock her lord. Ser Meryn, teach her.”
突来的一股狂念袭上她心头，她听见自己说：“或许我哥哥会把你的头拿来送我。”
This time the knight grasped her beneath the jaw and held her head still as he struck her. He hit her twice, left to right, and harder, right to left. Her lip split and blood ran down her chin, to mingle with the salt of her tears.
乔佛里皱起眉头。“不准你这样开我玩笑。一个好妻子绝不可以拿她丈夫乱开玩笑。马林爵士，教训教训她。”
“You shouldn’t be crying all the time,” Joffrey told her. “You’re more pretty when you smile and laugh.”
这回骑士打她时，用一只手紧紧托住她下巴。他一共打了两次，先打左边，然后更用力地打右边。她的嘴唇整个破了，鲜血一直流到下巴，混杂着咸咸的泪水。
Sansa made herself smile, afraid that he would have Ser Meryn hit her again if she did not, but it was no good, the king still shook his head. “Wipe off the blood, you’re all messy.”
“你不要整天哭哭啼啼。”乔佛里告诉她，“你笑起来比较漂亮。”
The outer parapet came up to her chin, but along the inner edge of the walk was nothing, nothing but a long plunge to the bailey seventy or eighty feet below. All it would take was a shove, she told herself. He was standing right there, right there , smirking at her with those fat wormlips. You could do it , she told herself. You could. Do it right now . It wouldn’t even matter if she went over with him. It wouldn’t matter at all.
珊莎勉强挤出微笑，深恐若是不从，他又会叫马林爵士打她。可惜她笑了还是没用，国王嫌恶地摇摇头：“把血擦掉，你这样难看死了。”
“Here, girl.” Sandor Clegane knelt before her, between her and Joffrey. With a delicacy surprising in such a big man, he dabbed at the blood welling from her broken lip.
外围的胸墙高到她下巴，但靠内的走道没有任何遮挡，距离下方的庭院足有七八十尺。用力一推就成了，她告诉自己。他就站在那里，就在那里，张着蠕虫般的嘴唇傻笑。你可以办到的，她告诉自己，你可以的，动手罢。即使跟他同归于尽也没关系，一点也没关系。
The moment was gone. Sansa lowered her eyes. “Thank you,” she said when he was done. She was a good girl, and always remembered her courtesies.
“过来，小妹妹。”桑铎·克里冈在她面前蹲下，正好挡在她和乔佛里之间。他轻轻地为她拭去自裂唇汩汩涌出的鲜血，动作出奇地温柔，令人很难与眼前的大个子联想在一起。
*DAENERYS
时机稍纵即逝，珊莎垂下眼睛。“谢谢。”他擦完之后，她向他道谢，因为她是个乖女孩，随时随地都要记得有礼貌。
W ings shadowed her fever dreams.
第六十九章 丹妮莉丝
“You don’t want to wake the dragon, do you?”
她发着高烧，噩梦连连，梦中有长了翅膀的黑影。
She was walking down a long hall beneath high stone arches. She could not look behind her, must not look behind her. There was a door ahead of her, tiny with distance, but even from afar, she saw that it was painted red. She walked faster, and her bare feet left bloody footprints on the stone.
“你不想唤醒睡龙之怒，对吧？”
“You don’t want to wake the dragon, do you?”
她在一个长长的大厅里走着，上方是高高的石拱。她无法转头，不能回头。在她前方极远之处有一扇门，因为距离的关系，显得相当微小，但她依旧看得出门乃是漆成红色。她加快步伐，赤裸的双脚在石地板上留下一个又一个血印。
She saw sunlight on the Dothraki sea, the living plain, rich with the smells of earth and death. Wind stirred the grasses, and they rippled like water. Drogo held her in strong arms, and his hand stroked her sex and opened her and woke that sweet wetness that was his alone, and the stars smiled down on them, stars in a daylight sky. “Home,” she whispered as he entered her and filled her with his seed, but suddenly the stars were gone, and across the blue sky swept the great wings, and the world took flame.
“你不想唤醒睡龙之怒，对吧？”
“… don’t want to wake the dragon, do you? ”
他看见阳光洒在生意盎然的多斯拉克海上，空气中充满泥土和死亡的气息。风吹草动，碧浪荡漾有如汪洋。卓戈用健壮的双手环抱住她，抚弄她，撩拨她，使她流出那甜蜜的汁液，只属于他的甜蜜汁液。天上的星星含笑俯视着他们，赤日和繁星。“家，”她轻声细语的同时，他进入她的身体，将精液注入她体内。突然间，星星不见了，巨大的翅膀横扫天际，世界起火燃烧。
Ser Jorah’s face was drawn and sorrowful. “Rhaegar was the last dragon,” he told her. He warmed translucent hands over a glowing brazier where stone eggs smouldered red as coals. One moment he was there and the next he was fading, his flesh colorless, less substantial than the wind. “The last dragon,” he whispered, thin as a wisp, and was gone. She felt the dark behind her, and the red door seemed farther away than ever.
“……不想唤醒睡龙之怒，对吧？”
“… don’t want to wake the dragon, do you? ”
乔拉爵士的脸憔悴而哀伤。“雷加是最后的真龙传人。”他边告诉她，边伸出半透明的手在火盆上取暖，火盆里躺着几颗石蛋，如煤炭般烧红冒烟。前一刻他还有血肉，紧接着便开始消逝，肌肉失去颜色，比风儿还要无形。“最后的真龙。”他的声音如一缕轻烟，接着他便消失无踪。她感觉到身后紧迫的黑暗，而那扇红门，却是越来越远。
Viserys stood before her, screaming. “The dragon does not beg, slut. You do not command the dragon. I am the dragon, and I will be crowned.” The molten gold trickled down his face like wax, burning deep channels in his flesh. “I am the dragon and I will be crowned!” he shrieked, and his fingers snapped like snakes, biting at her nipples, pinching, twisting, even as his eyes burst and ran like jelly down seared and blackened cheeks.
“……不想唤醒睡龙之怒，对吧？”
“… don’t want to wake the dragon … ”
韦赛里斯站在她面前，厉声尖叫：“你这个小贱货，真龙是不会低声下气的，不准你对真龙之子颐指气使。我是真龙传人，我会得到王冠！”融化的黄金像蜡一样从他脸上流下，烧出条条深陷的凹痕。“我是真龙传人！我会得到王冠的！”他厉声嚎叫，手指像蛇一样，啮咬她的乳头，又捏又拧又扭，他的眼睛爆突出来，宛如胶冻，流下他焦黑的双颊。
The red door was so far ahead of her, and she could feel the icy breath behind, sweeping up on her. If it caught her she would die a death that was more than death, howling forever alone in the darkness. She began to run.
“……不想唤醒睡龙之怒……”
“… don’t want to wake the dragon … ”
红门在前方，好远好远，但她可以感觉到背后冰冷的气息朝她袭来，假如她被抓到，就会陷入比死亡更恐怖的境地，永远在无边黑暗中孤独地哀嚎。于是她开步快跑。
She could feel the heat inside her, a terrible burning in her womb. Her son was tall and proud, with Drogo’s copper skin and her own silver-gold hair, violet eyes shaped like almonds. And he smiled for her and began to lift his hand toward hers, but when he opened his mouth the fire poured out. She saw his heart burning through his chest, and in an instant he was gone, consumed like a moth by a candle, turned to ash. She wept for her child, the promise of a sweet mouth on her breast, but her tears turned to steam as they touched her skin.
“……不想唤醒睡龙之怒……”
“… want to wake the dragon … ”
她感觉到体内的热气，仿佛有什么可怕的东西正在她的子宫燃烧。她的儿子生得高大威武，有卓戈的古铜色皮肤和她银金色的头发，以及杏仁形状的紫罗兰色眼睛。他对她微笑，朝她伸手拥抱，然而当他张开嘴巴，吐出的却是滔天烈焰。她看见他的心脏正在胸腔里熊熊燃烧，只一瞬间，人便消失得无影无踪，有如扑火飞蛾被烛焰吞噬，化为灰烬。她为孩子哭泣，哀悼这原本会吸吮她乳房的甜美婴孩，但她的泪水一碰肌肤，竟立即化成蒸汽。
Ghosts lined the hallway, dressed in the faded raiment of kings. In their hands were swords of pale fire. They had hair of silver and hair of gold and hair of platinum white, and their eyes were opal and amethyst, tourmaline and jade. “Faster,” they cried, “faster, faster.” She raced, her feet melting the stone wherever they touched. “Faster!” the ghosts cried as one, and she screamed and threw herself forward. A great knife of pain ripped down her back, and she felt her skin tear open and smelled the stench of burning blood and saw the shadow of wings. And Daenerys Targaryen flew.
“……唤醒睡龙之怒……”
“… wake the dragon … ”
鬼魂罗列长厅两侧，穿着古代君王的褪色服饰，手握淡色火焰剑，他们的头发有的银色、有的金黄，有的亮如白金，眼睛则是蛋白石、紫水晶、电气石和翡翠的颜色。“快！”他们高叫，“快，快跑！”她拔腿飞奔，每次落脚，都融化了石地板。“快跑！”鬼魂齐声呐喊，她跟着尖叫，往前扑去。剧痛有如一把尖刀，划过她的背脊，她只觉自己的皮肤被撕扯开来，闻到鲜血蒸腾的臭味，看到巨大翅膀的阴影。然后，丹妮莉丝·坦格利安飞了起来。
The door loomed before her, the red door, so close, so close, the hall was a blur around her, the cold receding behind. And now the stone was gone and she flew across the Dothraki sea, high and higher, the green rippling beneath, and all that lived and breathed fled in terror from the shadow of her wings. She could smell home, she could see it, there, just beyond that door, green fields and great stone houses and arms to keep her warm, there . She threw open the door.
“……唤醒睡龙……”
“… the dragon … ”
红门就耸立在她面前，越来越近，越来越近，长厅变成周围的一团模糊，冷气自她身后退去，石地板也消失不见。她飞越过多斯拉克海，越飞越高，任绿海在下方波荡，世上所有的生物都在她的翅膀阴影下亡命奔逃。她闻到家的味道，见到家的景致，在门的那边，有茵绿田野和石砌大房，有温暖她心房的怀抱，就在那边。她猛地打开门。
And saw her brother Rhaegar, mounted on a stallion as black as his armor. Fire glimmered red through the narrow eye slit of his helm. “The last dragon,” Ser Jorah’s voice whispered faintly. “The last, the last.” Dany lifted his polished black visor. The face within was her own.
“……睡龙……”
After that, for a long time, there was only the pain, the fire within her, and the whisperings of stars.
看见的是哥哥雷加，身穿漆黑盔甲，骑着同样颜色的骏马，在头盔的狭窄眼缝内，有火焰熊熊燃烧。“最后的真龙传人，”乔拉爵士在微弱低语，“最后的，最后的。”丹妮揭开他擦亮的黑面罩，发现里面的那张脸，竟然是她自己。
She woke to the taste of ashes.
在那之后，长长久久，痛楚，体内燃烧的熊熊大火和低声细语的群星，覆盖了整个天地。
“No,” she moaned, “no, please.”
她骤然醒来，嘴里有灰烬的味道。
“Khaleesi?” Jhiqui hovered over her, a frightened doe.
“不，”她呻吟道，“不要，求求你！”
The tent was drenched in shadow, still and close. Flakes of ash drifted upward from a brazier, and Dany followed them with her eyes through the smoke hole above. Flying , she thought. I had wings, I was flying . But it was only a dream. “Help me,” she whispered, struggling to rise. “Bring me …” Her voice was raw as a wound, and she could not think what she wanted. Why did she hurt so much? It was as if her body had been torn to pieces and remade from the scraps. “I want …”
“卡丽熙？”姬琪凑过来，像一头害怕的雌鹿。
“Yes, Khaleesi.” Quick as that Jhiqui was gone, bolting from the tent, shouting. Dany needed … something … someone … what? It was important, she knew. It was the only thing in the world that mattered. She rolled onto her side and got an elbow under her, fighting the blanket tangled about her legs. It was so hard to move. The world swam dizzily. I have to …
帐篷沉浸在黑影中，寂静而封闭。无数碎片的灰烬自火盆向上飘散，丹妮的视线跟着它们穿过上方的排烟口。飞啊，她心想，我有了翅膀，我会飞了。然而那究竟只是惊梦一场。“救救我，”她小声说，挣扎着想站起来。“请给我……”她的喉咙沙哑刺痛，想不起来自己究竟要什么。为什么痛得如此厉害？她觉得自己的身体好似被撕成碎片，又再重新组合。“我要……”
They found her on the carpet, crawling toward her dragon eggs. Ser Jorah Mormont lifted her in his arms and carried her back to her sleeping silks, while she struggled feebly against him. Over his shoulder she saw her three handmaids, Jhogo with his little wisp of mustache, and the flat broad face of Mirri Maz Duur. “I must,” she tried to tell them, “I have to …”
“是的，卡丽熙。”说完姬琪便飞奔出去，大声喊叫，帐里则空无一人。丹妮想要……某件东西……某个人……到底是什么？她知道这很重要，世界上只有这件事最重要。她翻过身，用手肘支撑身体，与纠缠双脚的毛毯搏斗。移动好难好难：整个世界天旋地转。我一定要……
“… sleep, Princess,” Ser Jorah said.
他们进来时，发现她倒卧在地毯上，正朝那几颗龙蛋爬去。乔拉·莫尔蒙爵士把她抱回丝床上，她虚弱地抵抗。从他的肩头后方，她看到了自己的三个女仆，长了点小胡子的乔戈，以及弥丽·马兹·笃尔那张平板的阔脸。“我必须，”她试图告诉他们，“我一定要……”
“No,” Dany said. “Please. Please.”
“……睡吧，公主殿下。”乔拉爵士说。
“Yes.” He covered her with silk, though she was burning. “Sleep and grow strong again, Khaleesi . Come back to us.” And then Mirri Maz Duur was there, the maegi , tipping a cup against her lips. She tasted sour milk, and something else, something thick and bitter. Warm liquid ran down her chin. Somehow she swallowed. The tent grew dimmer, and sleep took her again. This time she did not dream. She floated, serene and at peace, on a black sea that knew no shore.
“不，”丹妮说：“求求你，求求你。”
After a time—a night, a day, a year, she could not say—she woke again. The tent was dark, its silken walls flapping like wings when the wind gusted outside. This time Dany did not attempt to rise. “Irri,” she called, “Jhiqui. Doreah.” They were there at once. “My throat is dry,” she said, “so dry,” and they brought her water. It was warm and flat, yet Dany drank it eagerly, and sent Jhiqui for more. Irri dampened a soft cloth and stroked her brow. “I have been sick,” Dany said. The Dothraki girl nodded. “How long?” The cloth was soothing, but Irri seemed so sad, it frightened her. “Long,” she whispered. When Jhiqui returned with more water, Mirri Maz Duur came with her, eyes heavy from sleep. “Drink,” she said, lifting Dany’s head to the cup once more, but this time it was only wine. Sweet, sweet wine. Dany drank, and lay back, listening to the soft sound of her own breathing. She could feel the heaviness in her limbs, as sleep crept in to fill her up once more. “Bring me …” she murmured, her voice slurred and drowsy. “Bring … I want to hold …”
“一定要。”他为她盖上丝被，也不管她浑身发烫。“卡丽熙，好好睡，赶快好起来，回到我们身边。”接着，那巫魔女弥丽·马兹·笃尔出现了，她拿着一个杯子靠到她唇边。她尝出里面酸牛奶的味道，还有另一种浓而苦涩的东西。温热的液体流过她的下巴，她麻木地吞了下去。于是营帐渐渐黯淡，她再度入睡，这回没有做梦，而是在一片无边无际的黑色汪洋上漂浮，恬适而安宁。
“Yes?” the maegi asked. “What is it you wish, Khaleesi?”
过了一段时间——一个晚上，一天，还是一年，她不知道——她再度醒来，帐里一片漆黑，外面劲风吹拂，丝质帷幕有如飞翅般啪啦作响。这次丹妮不再挣扎起身。“伊丽，”她叫道：“姬琪、多莉亚。”她们立刻出现。“我的喉咙好干，”她说，“好干、好干。”于是她们拿来了水。这水温热而无味，但丹妮却饥渴地喝个精光，并差姬琪多拿一点。伊丽浸湿一块软布，擦拭她的额头。“我生病了么？”丹妮说。多斯拉克女孩点点头。“病了多久？”湿布很舒爽，但伊丽的神情却无比哀伤，她不禁害怕起来。“很久，”女仆小声说。姬琪拿水回来时，睡眼朦胧的弥丽·马兹·笃尔也跟着来了。“喝吧。”她边说边再度抬起丹妮的头就着杯子，不过这次杯中是葡萄酒，好甜好甜的酒。丹妮喝完以后，躺了回去，听着自己轻柔的呼吸，只觉四肢沉重，睡意又袭上心头。“我要……”她喃喃道，声音含混而模糊。“我要……我要抱……”
“Bring me … egg … dragon’s egg … please …” Her lashes turned to lead, and she was too weary to hold them up.
“要什么？”巫魔女问，“卡丽熙，您要什么？”
When she woke the third time, a shaft of golden sunlight was pouring through the smoke hole of the tent, and her arms were wrapped around a dragon’s egg. It was the pale one, its scales the color of butter cream, veined with whorls of gold and bronze, and Dany could feel the heat of it. Beneath her bedsilks, a fine sheen of perspiration covered her bare skin. Dragondew , she thought. Her fingers trailed lightly across the surface of the shell, tracing the wisps of gold, and deep in the stone she felt something twist and stretch in response. It did not frighten her. All her fear was gone, burned away.
“我要……蛋……龙蛋……麻烦你……”她的眼皮沉重如铅，而她太累太倦，再没力气张开它们。
Dany touched her brow. Under the film of sweat, her skin was cool to the touch, her fever gone. She made herself sit. There was a moment of dizziness, and the deep ache between her thighs. Yet she felt strong. Her maids came running at the sound of her voice. “Water,” she told them, “a flagon of water, cold as you can find it. And fruit, I think. Dates.”
待她三度睁眼，一缕金色的阳光正从帐顶的排烟口直射而进，而她的双手环抱着一颗龙蛋。是乳白的那颗，奶油色的鳞壳，有金黄和青铜的螺旋条纹，丹妮可以感觉到龙蛋所散发出的热度。在丝被之下，她全身覆满一层晶莹的汗水，这就是龙露吧，她心想。她伸出手指，轻轻拂过蛋壳，沿着缕缕金黄挪移，感觉到石蛋深处有什么东西在跃动着、伸展着遥相应和。她并不害怕，所有的恐惧都已经随着高热焚烧殆尽了。
“As you say, Khaleesi.”
丹妮摸摸额头，汗水之下，皮肤凉凉的，高烧已退。她逼自己坐起来，虽然有点短暂的晕眩，两腿深处还很疼痛，但她觉得体力已经恢复。女仆们听到她的响动，急忙跑来。“我要喝水，”她告诉她们，“帮我拿瓶水来，越凉越好。再拿点水果，我想吃枣子。”
“I want Ser Jorah,” she said, standing. Jhiqui brought a sandsilk robe and draped it over her shoulders. “And a warm bath, and Mirri Maz Duur, and …” Memory came back to her all at once, and she faltered. “Khal Drogo,” she forced herself to say, watching their faces with dread. “Is he—?”
“遵命，卡丽熙。”
“The khal lives,” Irri answered quietly … yet Dany saw a darkness in her eyes when she said the words, and no sooner had she spoken than she rushed away to fetch water.
“我要见乔拉爵士。”说着她站起来，姬琪拿了一件纱丝长袍给她披上。“还要洗个温水澡。把弥丽·马兹·笃尔也叫来，还有……”回忆突然同时涌现，她讲不下去。“卓戈卡奥。”她逼自己说出口，惊恐地看着她们的脸庞。“他是不是——”
She turned to Doreah. “Tell me.”
“卡奥他还活着。”伊丽静静地回答……但在她说话的同时，丹妮却在她眼中察觉了一抹黯淡，她话一说完，就连忙跑出去拿水了。
“I … I shall bring Ser Jorah,” the Lysene girl said, bowing her head and fleeing the tent.
于是她转向多莉亚：“告诉我是怎么回事。”
Jhiqui would have run as well, but Dany caught her by the wrist and held her captive. “What is it? I must know. Drogo … and my child.” Why had she not remembered the child until now? “My son … Rhaego … where is he? I want him.”
“我……我去找乔拉爵士。”里斯女孩说罢鞠了个躬，逃离了帐篷。
Her handmaid lowered her eyes. “The boy … he did not live, Khaleesi.” Her voice was a frightened whisper.
姬琪原本也要跑，可丹妮抓住她的手腕，将她扣留下来。“到底怎么回事？我一定要知道。卓戈……和我的孩子。”为何她现在才想起孩子？“我儿子……雷戈……他在哪里？我要看看他。”
Dany released her wrist. My son is dead , she thought as Jhiqui left the tent. She had known somehow. She had known since she woke the first time to Jhiqui’s tears. No, she had known before she woke. Her dream came back to her, sudden and vivid, and she remembered the tall man with the copper skin and long silver-gold braid, bursting into flame.
女仆垂下眼睛。“孩子……没活成，卡丽熙。”她的声音只剩惊恐的呓语。
She should weep, she knew, yet her eyes were dry as ash. She had wept in her dream, and the tears had turned to steam on her cheeks. All the grief has been burned out of me , she told herself. She felt sad, and yet … she could feel Rhaego receding from her, as if he had never been.
丹妮松开手腕，任姬琪逃出营帐。我儿子死了，她怔怔地想。不知怎地，她好像早就知道，在她第一次醒来，看见姬琪泪流满面之前，不对，还没醒来前她就知道了。梦境突然袭上心头，历历如绘，她想起那个高个子，有着古铜色皮肤和银金色发辫，轰地葬身烈焰。
Ser Jorah and Mirri Maz Duur entered a few moments later, and found Dany standing over the other dragon’s eggs, the two still in their chest. It seemed to her that they felt as hot as the one she had slept with, which was passing strange. “Ser Jorah, come here,” she said. She took his hand and placed it on the black egg with the scarlet swirls. “What do you feel?”
她知道自己应该哭泣，但双眼却干如灰烬。因为她在梦中已经哭过，泪水一碰两颊便化为蒸汽。所有的悲伤，已在我体内蒸腾干净，她告诉自己。她虽然哀痛，可是……她只感到雷戈渐渐离她远去，仿佛从未存在。
“Shell, hard as rock.” The knight was wary. “Scales.”
须臾，当乔拉爵士和弥丽·马兹·笃尔走进帐篷时，丹妮跑去查看另外两颗龙蛋。那两颗蛋还在箱子里，却和她睡觉时抱着的那颗同样发热，实在很奇怪。“乔拉爵士，请你过来。”她执起他的手，将之放在那颗有鲜红条纹的黑色龙蛋上。“你有什么感觉？”
“Heat?”
“蛋壳，硬得像石头。”骑士的神情有些谨慎。“还有鳞片。”
“No. Cold stone.” He took his hand away. “Princess, are you well? Should you be up, weak as you are?”
“热么？”
“Weak? I am strong, Jorah.” To please him, she reclined on a pile of cushions. “Tell me how my child died.”
“不热，冷冰冰的石头。”他抽开手。“公主殿下，您还好吗？您的身体还这么虚弱，现在起来好吗？”
“He never lived, my princess. The women say …” He faltered, and Dany saw how the flesh hung loose on him, and the way he limped when he moved.
“虚弱？乔拉，我的身体很强壮。”为了让他放心，她在一堆靠垫上坐下。“告诉我，我儿子是怎么死的。”
“Tell me. Tell me what the women say.”
“公主殿下，他根本就没活成。那些女人说……”他止住不说，丹妮这才发现他整个人已经垮了，移动时跛着脚。
He turned his face away. His eyes were haunted. “They say the child was …”
“告诉我，告诉我那些女人说了些什么。”
She waited, but Ser Jorah could not say it. His face grew dark with shame. He looked half a corpse himself.
他别过头去，眼里仿佛有些愧疚。“她们说那孩子是……”
“Monstrous,” Mirri Maz Duur finished for him. The knight was a powerful man, yet Dany understood in that moment that the maegi was stronger, and crueler, and infinitely more dangerous. “Twisted. I drew him forth myself. He was scaled like a lizard, blind, with the stub of a tail and small leather wings like the wings of a bat. When I touched him, the flesh sloughed off the bone, and inside he was full of graveworms and the stink of corruption. He had been dead for years.”
她耐心等待，但乔拉爵士说不出口。他的脸色因羞愧而黯淡，看上去活像一具行尸走肉。
Darkness , Dany thought. The terrible darkness sweeping up behind to devour her. If she looked back she was lost. “My son was alive and strong when Ser Jorah carried me into this tent,” she said. “I could feel him kicking, fighting to be born.”
“那孩子是个怪物，”弥丽·马兹·笃尔替他说完。骑士虽然武艺超群，但丹妮明白此刻巫魔女比他更有力量、更残酷，更是难以想像地危险。“整个人畸形扭曲。我亲自帮他接生，他像蜥蜴一样全身长满鳞片，眼睛是瞎的，屁股上生了条短尾巴，还有一对像蝙蝠一样的小翅膀。我一碰他，他的皮肉就从骨头上脱落，里面满满的都是蛆虫，散发出腐烂的恶臭，他已经死了很多年了。”
“That may be as it may be,” answered Mirri Maz Duur, “yet the creature that came forth from your womb was as I said. Death was in that tent, Khaleesi.”
就是那股黑暗，丹妮心想，就是那股紧追身后，想要吞噬她的恐怖黑暗。假如她回头，一切就都完了。“乔拉爵士把我抱进这座帐篷时，我儿子还健康强壮。”她说，“我感觉得到他不断拳打脚踢，急着要降临人世。”
“Only shadows,” Ser Jorah husked, but Dany could hear the doubt in his voice. “I saw, maegi . I saw you, alone, dancing with the shadows.”
“或许如此，”弥丽·马兹·笃尔回答，“可从你肚子里生出来的东西就是我刚刚说的那样。卡丽熙，当时这座帐篷里充满死亡。”
“The grave casts long shadows, Iron Lord,” Mirri said. “Long and dark, and in the end no light can hold them back.”
“不过是些影子，”乔拉爵士嘶声道，然而丹妮听得出他话中的疑虑。“我亲眼看到了，巫魔女，我看到你独自待在这里，和影子跳舞。”
Ser Jorah had killed her son, Dany knew. He had done what he did for love and loyalty, yet he had carried her into a place no living man should go and fed her baby to the darkness. He knew it too; the grey face, the hollow eyes, the limp. “The shadows have touched you too, Ser Jorah,” she told him. The knight made no reply. Dany turned to the godswife. “You warned me that only death could pay for life. I thought you meant the horse.”
“铁大王，坟墓洒下的影子是很长的，”弥丽说，“又长又暗，直到任何亮光都无法阻挡。”
“No,” Mirri Maz Duur said. “That was a lie you told yourself. You knew the price.”
丹妮明白了，是乔拉爵士害死了她儿子。他出于对她的敬爱和忠诚，将她抱进了一个任何活人都不该进入的地方，把她的宝贝喂给了黑暗。对此，他自己一清二楚；那张灰白的脸庞，那对空洞的眼瞳，那双不便于行的跛足，实实在在说明了他的悔恨。“乔拉爵士，你也被阴影所害。”她对他说，但骑士没有答话。丹妮转向女祭司，“你警告我：惟有死亡方能换取生命，我以为你指的是那匹马。”
Had she? Had she? If I look back I am lost . “The price was paid,” Dany said. “The horse, my child, Quaro and Qotho, Haggo and Cohollo. The price was paid and paid and paid.” She rose from her cushions. “Where is Khal Drogo? Show him to me, godswife, maegi , bloodmage, whatever you are. Show me Khal Drogo. Show me what I bought with my son’s life.”
“不对，”弥丽·马兹·笃尔道，“那只是您用来欺骗自己的谎言，您很清楚代价是什么。”
“As you command, Khaleesi,” the old woman said. “Come, I will take you to him.”
她知道么？她当时真的知道么？如果我回头，一切就都完了。“我已经付出了代价，”丹妮说：“我付出了那匹骏马，我的孩子，还有魁洛、柯索、哈戈和科霍罗，付了好多好多倍。”她霍地从靠垫上站起。“卓戈卡奥人在哪里？带我去见他，不管你是女祭司、巫魔女还是血巫，总之我要见他。我要看看我用儿子的性命换来了什么。”
Dany was weaker than she knew. Ser Jorah slipped an arm around her and helped her stand. “Time enough for this later, my princess,” he said quietly.
“如您所愿，卡丽熙。”老妇人说，“请随我来，我带您去见他。”
“I would see him now, Ser Jorah.”
丹妮远比自己以为的虚弱，乔拉爵士伸手环抱住她，支撑她站立。“公主殿下，以后有的是时间。”他静静地说。
After the dimness of the tent, the world outside was blinding bright. The sun burned like molten gold, and the land was seared and empty. Her handmaids waited with fruit and wine and water, and Jhogo moved close to help Ser Jorah support her. Aggo and Rakharo stood behind. The glare of sun on sand made it hard to see more, until Dany raised her hand to shade her eyes. She saw the ashes of a fire, a few score horses milling listlessly and searching for a bite of grass, a scattering of tents and bedrolls. A small crowd of children had gathered to watch her, and beyond she glimpsed women going about their work, and withered old men staring at the flat blue sky with tired eyes, swatting feebly at bloodflies. A count might show a hundred people, no more. Where the other forty thousand had made their camp, only the wind and dust lived now.
“乔拉爵士，我现在就要见他。”
“Drogo’s khalasar is gone,” she said.
习惯了帐篷内的昏暗，外面的世界亮得吓人。太阳如融化的黄金，烧灼着大地，炙烤的地面干裂而空洞。女仆们端着水、酒和瓜果等在一旁，乔戈走上前来，协助乔拉爵士搀扶她，阿戈和拉卡洛则站在后面。烈日照在沙地上，反射的强光使她很难视物，直到丹妮举手遮眼，这才见到一团营火的余烬，几十匹马无精打采地走来走去，寻找那一点点青草，此外还有少数的营帐和睡袋。一小群幼童围聚过来看她，更远处还有些妇人做着日常琐事，几名佝偻的老人，睁着疲倦不堪的眼睛，痴痴地望向湛蓝的天空，虚弱地挥赶血蝇。仔细一数，大约只有百来个人，就这么多。原先足足四万战士的营地，如今只剩风沙和尘土。
“A khal who cannot ride is no khal,” said Jhogo.
“卓戈的卡拉萨走了。”她说。
“The Dothraki follow only the strong,” Ser Jorah said. “I am sorry, my princess. There was no way to hold them. Ko Pono left first, naming himself Khal Pono, and many followed him. Jhaqo was not long to do the same. The rest slipped away night by night, in large bands and small. There are a dozen new khalasars on the Dothraki sea, where once there was only Drogo’s.”
“无法骑马的卡奥没有资格当卡奥。”乔戈道。
“The old remain,” said Aggo. “The frightened, the weak, and the sick. And we who swore. We remain.”
“多斯拉克人只追随强者，”乔拉爵士说，“公主殿下，我很抱歉，我们实在留不住人。波诺‘寇’第一个离开，并自称波诺卡奥，不少人跟了他。没过多久，贾科也如法炮制。剩下的人则趁着夜色，大群小群地，一天一天走光。从前多斯拉克海中只有卓戈的卡拉萨，如今却有了十多个新的。”
“They took Khal Drogo’s herds, Khaleesi,” Rakharo said. “We were too few to stop them. It is the right of the strong to take from the weak. They took many slaves as well, the khal’s and yours, yet they left some few.”
“老人们留了下来，”阿戈说，“还有胆小鬼、弱者和病夫，以及发过誓的我们。我们决不离开您。”
“Eroeh?” asked Dany, remembering the frightened child she had saved outside the city of the Lamb Men.
“卡丽熙，他们带走了卓戈卡奥的牧群，”拉卡洛道，“我们人手太少，阻止不了他们。抢夺弱者本是强者的权利。他们还抢走了很多奴隶，卡奥和您的都有，只留了几个下来。”
“Mago seized her, who is Khal Jhaqo’s bloodrider now,” said Jhogo. “He mounted her high and low and gave her to his khal , and Jhaqo gave her to his other bloodriders. They were six. When they were done with her, they cut her throat.”
“埃萝叶呢？”丹妮想起自己在羊人城镇外拯救的受惊女孩，连忙问。
“It was her fate, Khaleesi,” said Aggo.
“马戈把她抓走，他如今是贾科卡奥的血盟卫，”乔戈说，“他先将她大骑特骑，然后把她给了他的卡奥，之后贾科又把她给了其他的血盟卫，而他总共有六个卫士。完事之后，他们割了她的喉咙。”
If I look back I am lost . “It was a cruel fate,” Dany said, “yet not so cruel as Mago’s will be. I promise you that, by the old gods and the new, by the lamb god and the horse god and every god that lives. I swear it by the Mother of Mountains and the Womb of the World. Before I am done with them, Mago and Ko Jhaqo will plead for the mercy they showed Eroeh.”
“卡丽熙，这是她的命。”阿戈道。
The Dothraki exchanged uncertain glances. “Khaleesi,” the handmaid Irri explained, as if to a child, “Jhaqo is a khal now, with twenty thousand riders at his back.”
如果我回头，一切就都完了。“这是她悲惨的命运，”丹妮说，“但马戈的命运将更悲惨。我以新旧诸神之名起誓，以羊神、马神和世上所有神灵之名起誓，向圣母山和世界的子宫湖起誓：在我处置他们之前，马戈和贾科将会哀求我按照他们对待埃萝叶的方式赐给他们慈悲。”
She lifted her head. “And I am Daenerys Stormborn, Daenerys of House Targaryen, of the blood of Aegon the Conqueror and Maegor the Cruel and old Valyria before them. I am the dragon’s daughter, and I swear to you, these men will die screaming. Now bring me to Khal Drogo.”
多斯拉克人不安地彼此对视。“卡丽熙，”女仆伊丽像对小孩子解释一般地跟她说，“贾科现在是卡奥，身后有两万名骑马战士。”
He was lying on the bare red earth, staring up at the sun.
她昂首道：“我呢？我是‘暴风降生’丹妮莉丝，坦格利安家族的丹妮莉丝，我是征服者伊耿与残酷的梅葛的后裔，血缘可以上溯至古老的瓦雷利亚民族。吾乃真龙之女，我向你们发誓，这些人将会尖叫痛苦而死。现在，带我去见卓戈卡奥。”
A dozen bloodflies had settled on his body, though he did not seem to feel them. Dany brushed them away and knelt beside him. His eyes were wide open but did not see, and she knew at once that he was blind. When she whispered his name, he did not seem to hear. The wound on his breast was as healed as it would ever be, the scar that covered it grey and red and hideous.
他躺在光溜溜的红沙地上，睁眼望着太阳。
“Why is he out here alone, in the sun?” she asked them.
他的身上停了十几只血蝇，但他似乎浑然不觉。丹妮挥开苍蝇，在他身边跪下。他的眼睛睁得老大，却视而不见，她当下便明白他双目已瞎。可当她轻声说出他的名字，他似乎仍旧充耳不闻。他胸口的伤已经完全愈合，结成的疤又灰又红，看来十分狰狞可怕。
“He seems to like the warmth, Princess,” Ser Jorah said. “His eyes follow the sun, though he does not see it. He can walk after a fashion. He will go where you lead him, but no farther. He will eat if you put food in his mouth, drink if you dribble water on his lips.”
“他为什么一个人待在这里晒太阳？”她问他们。
Dany kissed her sun-and-stars gently on the brow, and stood to face Mirri Maz Duur. “Your spells are costly, maegi.”
“公主殿下，他似乎喜欢阳光的温暖，”乔拉爵士道，“他的眼睛会随太阳移动，虽然他根本看不到。他能走路，只要有人带着他，他会跟着走，但仅止于此。若把食物放进他的嘴中，他就会吃；若把清水滴到他唇上，他就会喝。”
“He lives,” said Mirri Maz Duur. “You asked for life. You paid for life.”
丹妮轻轻吻了她的日和星的额头，起身面对弥丽·马兹·笃尔。“巫魔女，你的法术可真是代价高昂。”
“This is not life, for one who was as Drogo was. His life was laughter, and meat roasting over a firepit, and a horse between his legs. His life was an arakh in his hand and his bells ringing in his hair as he rode to meet an enemy. His life was his bloodriders, and me, and the son I was to give him.”
“他活了下来，”弥丽·马兹·笃尔说，“您要的是他的生命，您也支付了生命。”
Mirri Maz Duur made no reply.
“对卓戈那样的人来说，这根本不是生命。他的生命是开怀大笑，是火炉上烧烤的肉块，是双腿间骑乘的骏马。他的生命是手握亚拉克弯刀，骑马迎敌，铃铛在发际作响。他的生命是他的血盟卫，是我，以及我原本要为他产下的儿子。”
“When will he be as he was?” Dany demanded.
弥丽·马兹·笃尔没有回答。
“When the sun rises in the west and sets in the east,” said Mirri Maz Duur. “When the seas go dry and mountains blow in the wind like leaves. When your womb quickens again, and you bear a living child. Then he will return, and not before.”
“要多久他才会变回以前那样？”丹妮质问。
Dany gestured at Ser Jorah and the others. “Leave us. I would speak with this maegi alone.” Mormont and the Dothraki withdrew. “You knew,” Dany said when they were gone. She ached, inside and out, but her fury gave her strength. “You knew what I was buying, and you knew the price, and yet you let me pay it.”
“等太阳从西边升起，在东边落下。”弥丽·马兹·笃尔说，“等海水干枯，山脉像枯叶一样随风吹落。等您的子宫再度胎动，您再次怀了孩子。到了那时候，他才会变回以前的模样，在那之前绝不可能。”
“It was wrong of them to burn my temple,” the heavy, flat-nosed woman said placidly. “That angered the Great Shepherd.”
丹妮朝乔拉爵士和其他人打个手势。“你们先退下，我要单独跟巫魔女谈谈。”莫尔蒙和多斯拉克人随即离开。“你明明知道，”等他们走后，丹妮开口道。不论她的内心和肉体有多么痛楚，愤怒却给了她力量。“你明知我会得到什么，也明知代价为何，却依旧让我付出了代价。”
“This was no god’s work,” Dany said coldly. If I look back I am lost . “You cheated me. You murdered my child within me.”
“他们烧了我的神庙，这是不对的。”肥胖的扁鼻妇人平静地说，“他们触怒了至高牧神。”
“The stallion who mounts the world will burn no cities now. His khalasar shall trample no nations into dust.”
“神灵才不会做出这种事，”丹妮冷冷地说。如果我回头，一切就都完了。“你欺骗了我，谋害了我体内的孩子。”
“I spoke for you,” she said, anguished. “I saved you.”
“是啊，骑着世界的骏马没有办法烧毁城市，他的卡拉萨再也无法令其他国度灰飞烟灭了。”
“Saved me?” The Lhazareen woman spat. “Three riders had taken me, not as a man takes a woman but from behind, as a dog takes a bitch. The fourth was in me when you rode past. How then did you save me? I saw my god’s house burn, where I had healed good men beyond counting. My home they burned as well, and in the street I saw piles of heads. I saw the head of a baker who made my bread. I saw the head of a boy I had saved from deadeye fever, only three moons past. I heard children crying as the riders drove them off with their whips. Tell me again what you saved.”
“是我替你求情，”她痛苦地说，“是我救了你。”
“Your life.”
“救我？”拉札林妇人啐了一口。“我被三个男人侵犯，那不是男女正常结合的姿势，而是从后面上，好像公狗和母狗交配一样。你骑马经过时，第四个男人正插入我体内。你要怎么救我？我亲眼见到我所信奉之神的庙堂遭到焚烧，而我曾在那里医治过不计其数的善男信女。我的家园被他们烧毁，街上随处可见堆堆人头，人头堆里有给我做面包吃的烘焙师傅，有罹患死眼热病，好不容易才被我救治的小男孩，而那不过是三个月前的事。我至今还能听见骑马战士挥动皮鞭，催赶孩童离开，他们震天动地地哭泣。你倒是说说看：你救了什么？”
Mirri Maz Duur laughed cruelly. “Look to your khal and see what life is worth, when all the rest is gone.”
“我救了你的命。”
Dany called out for the men of her khas and bid them take Mirri Maz Duur and bind her hand and foot, but the maegi smiled at her as they carried her off, as if they shared a secret. A word, and Dany could have her head off … yet then what would she have? A head? If life was worthless, what was death?
弥丽·马兹·笃尔冷酷地笑笑：“那就好好瞧瞧你的卡奥，让你明白当一切都消失的时候，生命究竟有何价值。”
They led Khal Drogo back to her tent, and Dany commanded them to fill a tub, and this time there was no blood in the water. She bathed him herself, washing the dirt and the dust from his arms and chest, cleaning his face with a soft cloth, soaping his long black hair and combing the knots and tangles from it till it shone again as she remembered. It was well past dark before she was done, and Dany was exhausted. She stopped for drink and food, but it was all she could do to nibble at a fig and keep down a mouthful of water. Sleep would have been a release, but she had slept enough … too long, in truth. She owed this night to Drogo, for all the nights that had been, and yet might be.
丹妮唤来卡斯部众，命他们逮捕弥丽·马兹·笃尔，将她五花大绑。然而当巫魔女被带走时，却对她露出微笑，仿佛两人间共享某种秘密。丹妮只需一个字，便可让她人头落地……但她又能得到什么？一颗头？假如生命都没了价值，死又何妨？
The memory of their first ride was with her when she led him out into the darkness, for the Dothraki believed that all things of importance in a man’s life must be done beneath the open sky. She told herself that there were powers stronger than hatred, and spells older and truer than any the maegi had learned in Asshai. The night was black and moonless, but overhead a million stars burned bright. She took that for an omen.
他们领着卓戈卡奥来到她的帐篷，丹妮命令他们将浴缸装满水，这次不是血水。她亲自为他沐浴，为他洗去手臂和胸膛的尘土，用软布拭净他的脸庞，为他长长的黑发抹上肥皂，将纠缠打结的地方梳理柔顺，直到头发如她记忆中那般乌黑发亮。完成之后，夜幕早已低垂，丹妮只觉筋疲力竭。她停下来吃东西，却只能吞下一颗无花果，喝了一口水。睡眠或许是种解脱，但她已经睡了很久……睡得太久了。为了从前和将来每个他们共有的晚上，她应该为他奉献今夜。
No soft blanket of grass welcomed them here, only the hard dusty ground, bare and strewn with stones. No trees stirred in the wind, and there was no stream to soothe her fears with the gentle music of water. Dany told herself that the stars would be enough. “Remember, Drogo,” she whispered. “Remember our first ride together, the day we wed. Remember the night we made Rhaego, with the khalasar all around us and your eyes on my face. Remember how cool and clean the water was in the Womb of the World. Remember, my sun-and-stars. Remember, and come back to me.”
她领他走进黑夜，初次结合的回忆伴随着她。多斯拉克人相信，所有的人生大事都应该让苍天作见证。她告诉自己，这世上有比仇恨更强大的力量，有比巫魔女在亚夏习得的妖术更古老更真切的魔法。夜空沉暗，明月隐没，头顶只有百万颗星星熠熠发光，她把这当作吉兆。
The birth had left her too raw and torn to take him inside of her, as she would have wanted, but Doreah had taught her other ways. Dany used her hands, her mouth, her breasts. She raked him with her nails and covered him with kisses and whispered and prayed and told him stories, and by the end she had bathed him with her tears. Yet Drogo did not feel, or speak, or rise.
这里没有柔软的草坪欢迎他们，只有坚硬飞尘的沙地，裸露的岩石。虽然没有微风吹拂的树林和潺潺溪涧温柔的水声抚平她的恐惧，但丹妮告诉自己，只需天际点点繁星便已足够。“卓戈，请你想起来，”她悄声说，“请你想起我们结婚那天晚上，我们的第一次结合。想起我们孕育雷戈的那个晚上，整个卡拉萨看着我们，而你的眼中只有我。想起世界的子宫湖，水有多么清凉澄澈。请你想起来啊，我的日和星，请你想起来，回到我身边。”
And when the bleak dawn broke over an empty horizon, Dany knew that he was truly lost to her. “When the sun rises in the west and sets in the east,” she said sadly. “When the seas go dry and mountains blow in the wind like leaves. When my womb quickens again, and I bear a living child. Then you will return, my sun-and-stars, and not before.”
由于刚生产完毕，伤口未愈，她无法如愿与他结合，不过多莉亚教过她其他方法，于是丹妮用上了她的手、她的嘴巴和她的胸乳，她用指甲抠他，在他身上印满吻痕，在他耳边轻声细语，向他祈求祷告，说故事给他听。末了，她用泪水淹没了他。
Never , the darkness cried, never never never .
然而卓戈没有知觉，没有说话，更没有勃起。
Inside the tent Dany found a cushion, soft silk stuffed with feathers. She clutched it to her breasts as she walked back out to Drogo, to her sun-and-stars. If I look back I am lost . It hurt even to walk, and she wanted to sleep, to sleep and not to dream.
当空洞荒凉的地平线上露出凄凉的曙光，丹妮终于知道自己永远地失去了他。“等太阳从西边升起，在东边落下。”她哀伤地说，“等海水干枯，山脉像枯叶一样随风吹落。等我的子宫再度胎动，我再次怀了孩子。到了那时候，我的日和星，你才会变回以前的模样，在那之前绝不可能。”
She knelt, kissed Drogo on the lips, and pressed the cushion down across his face.
回不来了，那股黑暗喊道，回不来了回不来了回不来了。
*TYRION
丹妮在帐篷里找到一个装满羽毛的柔软丝枕，将枕头紧抱在前胸，走回到她的日和星卓戈身边。如果我回头，一切就都完了。她走起路来觉得好痛苦，心中只想就此长眠，并不再做梦。
“T hey have my son,” Tywin Lannister said.
她在卓戈身边跪下，吻了他的双唇，然后用枕头盖住他的脸。
“They do, my lord.” The messenger’s voice was dulled by exhaustion. On the breast of his torn surcoat, the brindled boar of Crakehall was half-obscured by dried blood.
第七十章 提利昂
One of your sons, Tyrion thought. He took a sip of wine and said not a word, thinking of Jaime. When he lifted his arm, pain shot through his elbow, reminding him of his own brief taste of battle. He loved his brother, but he would not have wanted to be with him in the Whispering Wood for all the gold in Casterly Rock.
“我儿子在他们手上。”泰温·兰尼斯特说。
His lord father’s assembled captains and bannermen had fallen very quiet as the courier told his tale. The only sound was the crackle and hiss of the log burning in the hearth at the end of the long, drafty common room.
“是的，大人。”信使的声音因疲累而呆滞。在他破碎的无袖罩袍前胸部，干涸的血渍遮住了克雷赫家族的斑纹野猪。
After the hardships of the long relentless drive south, the prospect of even a single night in an inn had cheered Tyrion mightily … though he rather wished it had not been this inn again, with all its memories. His father had set a grueling pace, and it had taken its toll. Men wounded in the battle kept up as best they could or were abandoned to fend for themselves. Every morning they left a few more by the roadside, men who went to sleep never to wake. Every afternoon a few more collapsed along the way. And every evening a few more deserted, stealing off into the dusk. Tyrion had been half-tempted to go with them.
你两个儿子中的一个，提利昂心想。他啜了口酒，一言不发，心里想着詹姆。抬手之时，剧痛从肘部直冲脑际，提醒着他战场的滋味。他虽然爱哥哥，但就算给他全凯岩城的金子，他也不想和哥哥待在呓语森林。
He had been upstairs, enjoying the comfort of a featherbed and the warmth of Shae’s body beside him, when his squire had woken him to say that a rider had arrived with dire news of Riverrun. So it had all been for nothing. The rush south, the endless forced marches, the bodies left beside the road … all for naught. Robb Stark had reached Riverrun days and days ago.
父亲召集的诸侯和将领纷纷安静下来，听信使陈述事情经过。宽敞通风的旅馆长厅里，只有火炉中的柴薪在劈啪作晌。
“How could this happen?” Ser Harys Swyft moaned. “How? Even after the Whispering Wood, you had Riverrun ringed in iron, surrounded by a great host … what madness made Ser Jaime decide to split his men into three separate camps? Surely he knew how vulnerable that would leave them?”
经历了长途的急行南下，想到可以在旅店稍作歇息，虽然只有一晚，依旧使提利昂大为振奋……只是他暗暗希望别要又是这家充满回忆的旅店。父亲严令他们以耗尽体力的速度行进，结果损失惨重。战争中的伤员如果不能跟上，就落得被抛下来自生自灭的下场。每天早上他们动身之时，总有些人倒在路边，睡着便再没醒来；下午，又有另一些人筋疲力竭地瘫在道旁；到得晚上，更有些人当了逃兵，遁进夜色之中，连提利昂本人都很想跟他们一起走。
Better than you, you chinless craven , Tyrion thought. Jaime might have lost Riverrun, but it angered him to hear his brother slandered by the likes of Swyft, a shameless lickspittle whose greatest accomplishment was marrying his equally chinless daughter to Ser Kevan, and thereby attaching himself to the Lannisters.
片刻前，他人还在楼上，躺在柔软舒适的羽毛床上，怀抱雪伊温暖的身体。然而他的侍从匆匆跑来把他摇醒，报告说有人骑马带来奔流城方面的重大消息。他立刻明白他们是白跑了一趟。往南急奔，无止尽的急行军和弃于路边的尸体……全成了空。罗柏·史塔克早在好几天前便解了奔流城之围。
“I would have done the same,” his uncle responded, a good deal more calmly than Tyrion might have. “You have never seen Riverrun, Ser Harys, or you would know that Jaime had little choice in the matter. The castle is situated at the end of the point of land where the Tumblestone flows into the Red Fork of the Trident. The rivers form two sides of a triangle, and when danger threatens, the Tullys open their sluice gates upstream to create a wide moat on the third side, turning Riverrun into an island. The walls rise sheer from the water, and from their towers the defenders have a commanding view of the opposite shores for many leagues around. To cut off all the approaches, a besieger must needs place one camp north of the Tumblestone, one south of the Red Fork, and a third between the rivers, west of the moat. There is no other way, none.”
“这怎么可能？”哈瑞斯·史威佛爵士呻吟道，“怎么可能？即便在呓语森林之战以后，奔流城依旧为大军团团包围……詹姆爵士到底在想什么，怎会把部队分为三处驻扎？他总该清楚这样会有何风险吧？”
“Ser Kevan speaks truly, my lords,” the courier said. “We’d built palisades of sharpened stakes around the camps, yet it was not enough, not with no warning and the rivers cutting us off from each other. They came down on the north camp first. No one was expecting an attack. Marq Piper had been raiding our supply trains, but he had no more than fifty men. Ser Jaime had gone out to deal with them the night before … well, with what we thought was them. We were told the Stark host was east of the Green Fork, marching south …”
他比你这没下巴的懦夫清楚多了，提利昂心想。纵然詹姆丢了奔流城，然而听见哥哥被史威佛这种人毁谤，依旧令他怒火中烧。史威佛是个厚颜无耻的马屁精，他这辈子最大的成就，就是把他那个同样没下巴的女儿嫁给凯冯爵士，借此与兰尼斯特家族攀上亲戚。
“And your outriders?” Ser Gregor Clegane’s face might have been hewn from rock. The fire in the hearth gave a somber orange cast to his skin and put deep shadows in the hollows of his eyes. “They saw nothing? They gave you no warning?”
“换我也会这么做，”叔叔应道，提利昂若是开口，绝不会如他这般冷静。“哈瑞斯爵士，您没见过奔流城，不然您一定会清楚詹姆别无选择。奔流城座落于腾石河汇流进三叉戟河的支流红叉河的三角洲尖端，河流构成了三角形的两边，而一旦遇到危险，徒利家便打开上游的闸门，在第三边造出宽阔的护城河，将奔流城变为河中孤岛。城墙自水中高高拔起，守军自塔楼上可以看清对岸数里格之内的所有事物。若要切断各方支援，攻城方必须在腾石河北岸、红又河南岸以及护城河西岸，亦即两条河之间，各放置一支军队。除此之外，别无他法。
The bloodstained messenger shook his head. “Our outriders had been vanishing. Marq Piper’s work, we thought. The ones who did come back had seen nothing.”
“诸位大人，凯冯爵士说得没错，”信使说，“我军已在营地周围密布削尖木栅，但在没有任何预警，河水又把我们的营地互相切断的情况下，这样的准备远远不够。他们首先袭击北方的营地，时机完全出乎我们的意料。先前，马柯·派柏不断骚扰我军的补给车队，但他手下只有五六十人。遭受攻击的前一晚，詹姆爵士亲自带兵去对付他们……唉，当时我们以为目标就是派柏那伙人。我们听说史塔克军还在绿叉河东岸，正朝南而去……”
“A man who sees nothing has no use for his eyes,” the Mountain declared. “Cut them out and give them to your next outrider. Tell him you hope that four eyes might see better than two … and if not, the man after him will have six.”
“你们的斥候呢？”格雷果·克里冈爵士的脸活像石雕，火光为他的皮肤罩上了一层阴森的橙色，在他的眼眶底投下深深的阴影。“莫非他们什么都没看到？没给你们任何警讯？”
Lord Tywin Lannister turned his face to study Ser Gregor. Tyrion saw a glimmer of gold as the light shone off his father’s pupils, but he could not have said whether the look was one of approval or disgust. Lord Tywin was oft quiet in council, preferring to listen before he spoke, a habit Tyrion himself tried to emulate. Yet this silence was uncharacteristic even for him, and his wine was untouched.
满身血污的信使摇摇头。“我们的侦察部队最近不断失踪，我们以为是马柯·派柏搞的鬼。而偶尔回来的人又说什么也没发现。”
“You said they came at night,” Ser Kevan prompted.
“什么也发现不了表示他用不着眼睛，”魔山宣布，“把他们的眼睛挖出来，交给替补的斥候，告诉他：希望四只眼睛可以比两只眼睛看得清楚……如果他还是不行，那么下一个人就会有六只眼睛了。”
The man gave a weary nod. “The Blackfish led the van, cutting down our sentries and clearing away the palisades for the main assault. By the time our men knew what was happening, riders were pouring over the ditch banks and galloping through the camp with swords and torches in hand. I was sleeping in the west camp, between the rivers. When we heard the fighting and saw the tents being fired, Lord Brax led us to the rafts and we tried to pole across, but the current pushed us downstream and the Tullys started flinging rocks at us with the catapults on their walls. I saw one raft smashed to kindling and three others overturned, men swept into the river and drowned … and those who did make it across found the Starks waiting for them on the riverbanks.”
泰温·兰尼斯特公爵转头审视格雷果爵士，提利昂看到父亲瞳中金光一闪，但他说不准那是赞许抑或嫌恶。泰温公爵在会议上通常保持缄默，宁可在发言前先倾听别人的意见，提利昂一直很想仿效他这个习惯。然而就算是父亲，如此沉默也很不寻常，他连酒都没碰。
Ser Flement Brax wore a silver-and-purple tabard and the look of a man who cannot comprehend what he has just heard. “My lord father—”
“你说他们发动夜袭？”凯冯爵士提问。
“Sorry, my lord,” the messenger said. “Lord Brax was clad in plate-and-mail when his raft overturned. He was very gallant.”
来人疲累地点点头。“前锋由黑鱼率领，砍倒我们的卫兵，清除栅栏，以利主力攻击。等我们的人醒悟过来，对方骑兵已经跃过沟渠，手执刀剑和火把冲进了营区。我睡在西寨，就是两条河之间的地方。我们这边的人听到打斗，看见帐篷着火，布拉克斯大人便领着大家上了木筏，想划到对岸去援救。然而水流湍急，直把我们往下游冲，徒利家的守军发现后，便用城墙上的投石机发动轰击。我亲眼看到一艘木筏被砸得稀烂，另外三艘翻倒，上面的人都被卷进河里淹死……而好不容易过河的人，却发现史塔克军正在对岸等着他们。”
He was a fool , Tyrion thought, swirling his cup and staring down into the winy depths. Crossing a river at night on a crude raft, wearing armor, with an enemy waiting on the other side—if that was gallantry, he would take cowardice every time. He wondered if Lord Brax had felt especially gallant as the weight of his steel pulled him under the black water.
佛列蒙·布拉克斯爵士穿着一件银紫相间的罩袍，脸上露出难以置信的表情。“我父亲，我父亲大人他——”
“The camp between the rivers was overrun as well,” the messenger was saying. “While we were trying to cross, more Starks swept in from the west, two columns of armored horse. I saw Lord Umber’s giant-in-chains and the Mallister eagle, but it was the boy who led them, with a monstrous wolf running at his side. I wasn’t there to see, but it’s said the beast killed four men and ripped apart a dozen horses. Our spearmen formed up a shieldwall and held against their first charge, but when the Tullys saw them engaged, they opened the gates of Riverrun and Tytos Blackwood led a sortie across the drawbridge and took them in the rear.”
“大人，我很遗憾。”信使说，“布拉克斯大人的筏子翻船时，他穿戴着全身铠和锁甲。他是个勇士。”
“Gods save us,” Lord Lefford swore.
他是个蠢蛋，提利昂心想，一边摇晃酒杯，朝杯中的漩涡望去。大半夜的，全副武装，乘着简陋的木筏穿过急流，朝对岸严阵以待的敌人扑去——假如这叫做勇士，他宁可每次都当懦夫。不知布拉克斯伯爵被沉重的盔甲拖进漆黑的深水时，有没有觉得特别英勇啊？
“Greatjon Umber fired the siege towers we were building, and Lord Blackwood found Ser Edmure Tully in chains among the other captives, and made off with them all. Our south camp was under the command of Ser Forley Prester. He retreated in good order when he saw that the other camps were lost, with two thousand spears and as many bowmen, but the Tyroshi sellsword who led his freeriders struck his banners and went over to the foe.”
“随后，两河之间的营地也被敌人攻陷，”信使续道，“我们忙着渡河时，史塔克军的重骑兵排成两个纵队，从西边杀出。我看到安柏伯爵的碎链巨人旗和梅利斯特家族的老鹰纹章，但最可怕的却是那个带头的小鬼，他身边跟了一头怪物似的狼。我没和他们交手，听说那只怪物杀了四个活人，咬死十几匹马。后来我军的长枪兵组成盾墙，挡住他们的第一次冲锋，谁料徒利家一看咱们无暇他顾，便打开奔流城门，由泰陀斯·布莱伍德率军渡过吊桥出击，偷袭我军后方。”
“Curse the man.” His uncle Kevan sounded more angry than surprised. “I warned Jaime not to trust that one. A man who fights for coin is loyal only to his purse.”
“诸神保佑。”莱佛德伯爵咒道。
Lord Tywin wove his fingers together under his chin. Only his eyes moved as he listened. His bristling golden sidewhiskers framed a face so still it might have been a mask, but Tyrion could see tiny beads of sweat dappling his father’s shaven head.
“大琼恩·安柏放火烧了我们辛苦建造的攻城塔，布莱伍德大人则找到了被我们锁起来的艾德慕·徒利爵士以及其他战俘，并将他们通通救走。南寨由佛勒·普莱斯特爵士指挥，眼见相邻的阵地纷纷失守，他便率领手下两千枪兵和两千弓箭手井井有条地向西撤退了，但那掌管自由骑手的泰洛西佣兵却砍断旗帜，投靠了敌方。”
“How could it happen?” Ser Harys Swyft wailed again. “Ser Jaime taken, the siege broken … this is a catastrophe!”
“该死的家伙，”凯冯叔叔的口气不仅惊讶，更加愤怒。“我早警告过詹姆别相信这混蛋，为钱而战的人只会为自己的腰包卖命。”
Ser Addam Marbrand said, “I am sure we are all grateful to you for pointing out the obvious, Ser Harys. The question is, what shall we do about it?”
泰温公爵十指交叉，顶着下巴，倾听时只有眼睛在动。他两颊的金黄短须围出一张纹丝不动的脸，活像一张面具。然而，提利昂注意到父亲的光头上密布细小汗珠。
“What can we do? Jaime’s host is all slaughtered or taken or put to flight, and the Starks and the Tullys sit squarely across our line of supply. We are cut off from the west! They can march on Casterly Rock if they so choose, and what’s to stop them? My lords, we are beaten. We must sue for peace.”
“这怎么可能？”哈瑞斯·史威佛爵士再度哀嚎。“詹姆爵士被俘，围城军队又遭击溃……简直是大难临头！”
“Peace?” Tyrion swirled his wine thoughtfully, took a deep draft, and hurled his empty cup to the floor, where it shattered into a thousand pieces. “There’s your peace, Ser Harys. My sweet nephew broke it for good and all when he decided to ornament the Red Keep with Lord Eddard’s head. You’ll have an easier time drinking wine from that cup than you will convincing Robb Stark to make peace now . He’s winning … or hadn’t you noticed?”
亚当·马尔布兰爵士道：“哈瑞斯爵士，我们都很感激您指出显而易见的事实，但眼下的当务之急是，我们下一步该怎么走？”
“Two battles do not make a war,” Ser Addam insisted. “We are far from lost. I should welcome the chance to try my own steel against this Stark boy.”
“还能怎么样？詹姆的军队不是被杀、被俘就是逃散，而史塔克家与徒利家的部队正好扼住我们的补给线，我们与西边的联系完全被切断了！他们甚至可以大摇大摆地进军凯岩城，谁又能阻止他们呢？诸位大人，我们战败了，应该立刻求和。”
“Perhaps they would consent to a truce, and allow us to trade our prisoners for theirs,” offered Lord Lefford.
“求和？”提利昂若有所思地晃着酒杯，一饮而尽，随后将空杯往地上一掷，摔成千百碎片。“哈瑞斯爵士，这就是求和的结果。打从我那好外甥决定拿艾德大人的头来装饰红堡的那一刻起，所有和谈的机会都粉碎了。眼下要跟罗柏·史塔克求和，比用地下这破杯装酒还难。占上风的是他……难道您没发现？”
“Unless they trade three-for-one, we still come out light on those scales,” Tyrion said acidly. “And what are we to offer for my brother? Lord Eddard’s rotting head?”
“两场战役的胜负并不能决定整个战争的成败，”亚当爵士坚持，“我们还远远没有战败。我很乐意跟这史塔克小鬼在战场上亲自较量较量。”
“I had heard that Queen Cersei has the Hand’s daughters,” Lefford said hopefully. “If we give the lad his sisters back …”
“或许他们会答应暂时停战，以便双方交换人质。”莱佛德伯爵提议。
Ser Addam snorted disdainfully. “He would have to be an utter ass to trade Jaime Lannister’s life for two girls.”
“除非他们愿意三个换一个——这样我们都嫌不够咧。”提利昂尖酸地说，“再说了，我们拿谁去换我哥哥？拿艾德大人烂掉的头么？”
“Then we must ransom Ser Jaime, whatever it costs,” Lord Lefford said.
“听说瑟曦太后手上握有首相的两个女儿，”莱佛德满怀希望地说，“假如我们提出把这小子的妹妹还给他……”
Tyrion rolled his eyes. “If the Starks feel the need for gold, they can melt down Jaime’s armor.”
亚当爵士轻蔑地哼了一声。“他疯了才拿詹姆·兰尼斯特的命来换两个小女生。”
“If we ask for a truce, they will think us weak,” Ser Addam argued. “We should march on them at once.”
“那就把詹姆爵士赎回来，不管花多少金子。”莱佛德伯爵道。
“Surely our friends at court could be prevailed upon to join us with fresh troops,” said Ser Harys. “And someone might return to Casterly Rock to raise a new host.”
提利昂翻起白眼。“史塔克家要真那么缺钱，把詹姆的盔甲拿去熔掉不就得啦。”
Lord Tywin Lannister rose to his feet. “They have my son,” he said once more, in a voice that cut through the babble like a sword through suet. “Leave me. All of you.”
“我们求和，他们就会看轻我们。”亚当爵士争辩，“依我之见，我们应该立刻进兵。”
Ever the soul of obedience, Tyrion rose to depart with the rest, but his father gave him a look. “Not you, Tyrion. Remain. And you as well, Kevan. The rest of you, out.”
“嗯，想必我们宫中的朋友会乐意提供补充兵力，”哈瑞斯爵士说，“同时也应当派人回凯岩城组织新军。”
Tyrion eased himself back onto the bench, startled into speechlessness. Ser Kevan crossed the room to the wine casks. “Uncle,” Tyrion called, “if you would be so kind—”
这时，泰温·兰尼斯特公爵霍地起身。“我儿子在他们手上！”他重复了一遍，声音穿透众声喧哗，宛如利剑划破油脂。“退下，统统退下。”
“Here.” His father offered him his cup, the wine untouched.
提利昂向来习于听命，于是他立即起身，准备和其他人一起离去。但父亲看了他一眼，“不，提利昂，你留下。凯冯，你也是。其他人给我出去。”
Now Tyrion truly was nonplussed. He drank.
提利昂坐回板凳，惊讶得说不出话来。凯冯爵士穿过房间，走到酒桶边。“叔叔，”提利昂叫道，“可否麻烦您——”
Lord Tywin seated himself. “You have the right of it about Stark. Alive, we might have used Lord Eddard to forge a peace with Winterfell and Riverrun, a peace that would have given us the time we need to deal with Robert’s brothers. Dead …” His hand curled into a fist. “Madness. Rank madness.”
“拿去。”父亲把自己面前那杯一动未动的酒递给他。
“Joff’s only a boy,” Tyrion pointed out. “At his age, I committed a few follies of my own.”
这下提利昂真有些不知所措。他只有喝的份。
His father gave him a sharp look. “I suppose we ought to be grateful that he has not yet married a whore.”
泰温公爵坐下来。“关于史塔克那边，你的判断没错。假如艾德大人还活着，我们可以用他当筹码，与临冬城和奔流城达成停战，如此一来，便有时间全力对付劳勃的两个弟弟。眼下他死了……”他的手紧握成拳。“胡来，完全是胡来。”
Tyrion sipped at his wine, wondering how Lord Tywin would look if he flung the cup in his face.
“小乔只是个孩子，”提利昂解释，“我在他这年纪的时候，也干过不少蠢事。”
“Our position is worse than you know,” his father went on. “It would seem we have a new king.”
父亲目光锐利地瞪了他一眼。“是么？好在他没娶妓女为妻。”
Ser Kevan looked poleaxed. “A new—who? What have they done to Joffrey?”
提利昂啜着酒，心想他若把酒杯朝父亲的脸上泼去，泰温公爵会是什么表情。
The faintest flicker of distaste played across Lord Tywin’s thin lips. “Nothing … yet. My grandson still sits the Iron Throne, but the eunuch has heard whispers from the south. Renly Baratheon wed Margaery Tyrell at Highgarden this fortnight past, and now he has claimed the crown. The bride’s father and brothers have bent the knee and sworn him their swords.”
“目前形势比你们所知的更糟，”父亲继续道，“我们有了个新国王。”
“Those are grave tidings.” When Ser Kevan frowned, the furrows in his brow grew deep as canyons.
凯冯爵士浑身一震。“新国——是谁？他们把乔佛里怎样了？”
“My daughter commands us to ride for King’s Landing at once, to defend the Red Keep against King Renly and the Knight of Flowers.” His mouth tightened. “Commands us, mind you. In the name of the king and council.”
一抹极细微的嫌恶扫过泰温公爵的薄唇。“没怎么样……至少到目前为止，我外孙依旧坐在铁王座上，但那太监收到南方的消息。两周前，蓝礼·拜拉席恩在高庭娶了玛格丽·提利尔为妻，并登基为王，新娘的父亲和兄长都已向他下跪宣誓效忠。”
“How is King Joffrey taking the news?” Tyrion asked with a certain black amusement.
“这真是坏消息。”凯冯爵士皱眉时，额上的沟纹深如峡谷。
“Cersei has not seen fit to tell him yet,” Lord Tywin said. “She fears he might insist on marching against Renly himself.”
“我女儿命令我们立刻前往君临，协防红堡，抵御蓝礼‘国王’和百花骑士。”他嘴唇一抿。“注意，她是以国王和御前会议之名‘命令’我们。”
“With what army?” Tyrion asked. “You don’t plan to give him this one, I hope?”
“乔佛里国王对此事有何反应？”提利昂带着某种黑色的兴致发问。
“He talks of leading the City Watch,” Lord Tywin said.
“瑟曦认为现在还不宜告诉他，”泰温公爵说，“她恐怕他会坚持亲自出兵征讨蓝礼。”
“If he takes the Watch, he’ll leave the city undefended,” Ser Kevan said. “And with Lord Stannis on Dragonstone …”
“出兵？哪来的军队？”提利昂问，“你该不会打算把这支军队交给他吧？”
“Yes.” Lord Tywin looked down at his son. “I had thought you were the one made for motley, Tyrion, but it would appear that I was wrong.”
“他曾宣称要率领都城守卫队出征。”泰温公爵道。
“Why, Father,” said Tyrion, “that almost sounds like praise.” He leaned forward intently. “What of Stannis? He’s the elder, not Renly. How does he feel about his brother’s claim?”
“他带走都城守卫队，城里势必防御空虚，”凯冯爵士说，“那么龙石岛的史坦尼斯公爵……”
His father frowned. “I have felt from the beginning that Stannis was a greater danger than all the others combined. Yet he does nothing. Oh, Varys hears his whispers. Stannis is building ships, Stannis is hiring sellswords, Stannis is bringing a shadowbinder from Asshai. What does it mean? Is any of it true?” He gave an irritated shrug. “Kevan, bring us the map.”
“是的。”泰温公爵睥睨着侏儒儿子。“提利昂，我原以为你生来只有杂耍的份，不过看来我是错了。”
Ser Kevan did as he was bid. Lord Tywin unrolled the leather, smoothing it flat. “Jaime has left us in a bad way. Roose Bolton and the remnants of his host are north of us. Our enemies hold the Twins and Moat Cailin. Robb Stark sits to the west, so we cannot retreat to Lannisport and the Rock unless we choose to give battle. Jaime is taken, and his army for all purposes has ceased to exist. Thoros of Myr and Beric Dondarrion continue to plague our foraging parties. To our east we have the Arryns, Stannis Baratheon sits on Dragonstone, and in the south Highgarden and Storm’s End are calling their banners.”
“哟，老爸，”提利昂说，“听起来好像赞美哩。”他笑着往前靠去。“那么，史坦尼斯方面有何行动？他才是长兄，蓝礼只是三子。对于弟弟称王一事，他有何反应？”
Tyrion smiled crookedly. “Take heart, Father. At least Rhaegar Targaryen is still dead.”
父亲皱眉道：“从一开始，我就认为史坦尼斯比其他所有人加起来还要危险，但他却毫无动静。嗯，瓦里斯是有些情报，比如史坦尼斯正在建造船只，史坦尼斯正在招募佣兵，还说史坦尼斯从亚夏找来一个缚影师，可这究竟代表着什么？其中又有多少属实？”他有些恼怒地耸耸肩。“凯冯，拿地图来。”
“I had hoped you might have more to offer us than japes, Tyrion,” Lord Tywin Lannister said.
凯冯爵士即刻照办。泰温公爵展开皮地图，将之摊平。“詹姆留给我们一个烂摊子。卢斯·波顿及其残部在我们北方，我们的敌人还握有孪河城和卡林湾；另一方面，罗柏·史塔克坐镇西边，除非开战，我们无法退回兰尼斯特港和凯岩城。詹姆既已被捕，他的军队便也不复存在，密尔的索罗斯和贝里·唐德利恩将继续骚扰我们的征粮部队。往更远的方面看，东有艾林家族和盘据龙石岛的史坦尼斯·拜拉席恩，南边的高庭和风息堡也已经整兵待发。”
Ser Kevan frowned over the map, forehead creasing. “Robb Stark will have Edmure Tully and the lords of the Trident with him now. Their combined power may exceed our own. And with Roose Bolton behind us … Tywin, if we remain here, I fear we might be caught between three armies.”
提利昂狡猾地笑了笑。“父亲，别担心，至少雷加·坦格利安还没死而复生。”
“I have no intention of remaining here. We must finish our business with young Lord Stark before Renly Baratheon can march from Highgarden. Bolton does not concern me. He is a wary man, and we made him warier on the Green Fork. He will be slow to give pursuit. So … on the morrow, we make for Harrenhal. Kevan, I want Ser Addam’s outriders to screen our movements. Give him as many men as he requires, and send them out in groups of four. I will have no vanishings.”
“提利昂，我希望你能提供一点有用的建议，不要只要嘴皮子。”泰温·兰尼斯特公爵说。
“As you say, my lord, but … why Harrenhal? That is a grim, unlucky place. Some call it cursed.”
凯冯爵士看着地图皱眉，额头又挤成条条深缝。“眼下罗柏·史塔克得到艾德慕·徒利和三河诸侯的支持，他们的总兵力超过了我军，我们后方还有卢斯。波顿……泰温，留在这里，只怕会被三面夹击。”
“Let them,” Lord Tywin said. “Unleash Ser Gregor and send him before us with his reavers. Send forth Vargo Hoat and his freeriders as well, and Ser Amory Lorch. Each is to have three hundred horse. Tell them I want to see the riverlands afire from the Gods Eye to the Red Fork.”
“我不打算留在这里。我们得在蓝礼从高庭出兵前解决掉小史塔克公爵。波顿那边我不担心，他是个谨慎的人，想必绿叉河之战只会使他更谨慎，因此他的追击不会很快。所以……明日一早我们便朝赫伦堡出发。凯冯，命令亚当爵士的斥候掩蔽我军行踪，他要多少人就给他多少人，四人为一小队，不准再发生失踪的事……”
“They will burn, my lord,” Ser Kevan said, rising. “I shall give the commands.” He bowed and made for the door.
“遵命，大人，可是……为什么去赫伦堡？那是个阴森不祥的地方，听说还受了诅咒。”
When they were alone, Lord Tywin glanced at Tyrion. “Your savages might relish a bit of rapine. Tell them they may ride with Vargo Hoat and plunder as they like—goods, stock, women, they may take what they want and burn the rest.”
“让他们去说，”泰温公爵道，“把格雷果爵士放出去，要他领着那群屠夫四处劫掠。把瓦格·霍特和他的佣兵以及亚摩利·洛奇爵士也派出去，让他们各带三百骑兵，告诉他们：从神眼湖到红叉河，我希望河间地带化为焦土。”
“Telling Shagga and Timett how to pillage is like telling a rooster how to crow,” Tyrion commented, “but I should prefer to keep them with me.” Uncouth and unruly they might be, yet the wildlings were his , and he trusted them more than any of his father’s men. He was not about to hand them over.
“大人，请拭目以待。”凯冯爵士说罢起身。“我这就去传令。”他鞠躬离去。
“Then you had best learn to control them. I will not have the city plundered.”
剩下父子俩之后，泰温公爵瞄了提利昂一眼。“你的野蛮人可能也喜欢来点掠夺，你去通知他们：他们尽可以随瓦格·赫特出动，任意劫掠——不论财货、牲口还是女人，喜欢的就抢，不中意的就烧。”
“The city?” Tyrion was lost. “What city would that be?”
“教夏嘎和提魅如何抢劫，就跟教公鸡怎么报晓一般多此一举。”提利昂表示，“但我宁可把他们留在身边。”他们或许粗鲁难驯，但终究是他的手下，相较于父亲的人马，他宁愿信任自己的人。他可不想就这么将他们拱手让人。
“King’s Landing. I am sending you to court.”
“那你得学会如何管束他们，我不想见到他们在城里打家劫舍。”
It was the last thing Tyrion Lannister would ever have anticipated. He reached for his wine, and considered for a moment as he sipped. “And what am I to do there?”
“城里？”提利昂糊涂了，“哪个城？”
“Rule,” his father said curtly.
“君临。我要派你进宫。”
Tyrion hooted with laughter. “My sweet sister might have a word or two to say about that!”
这是提利昂·兰尼斯特最没预料到的事。他举起酒杯，边喝边想，“派我进宫做什么？”
“Let her say what she likes. Her son needs to be taken in hand before he ruins us all. I blame those jackanapes on the council—our friend Petyr, the venerable Grand Maester, and that cockless wonder Lord Varys. What sort of counsel are they giving Joffrey when he lurches from one folly to the next? Whose notion was it to make this Janos Slynt a lord? The man’s father was a butcher , and they grant him Harrenhal. Harrenhal , that was the seat of kings! Not that he will ever set foot inside it, if I have a say. I am told he took a bloody spear for his sigil. A bloody cleaver would have been my choice.” His father had not raised his voice, yet Tyrion could see the anger in the gold of his eyes. “And dismissing Selmy, where was the sense in that? Yes, the man was old, but the name of Barristan the Bold still has meaning in the realm. He lent honor to any man he served. Can anyone say the same of the Hound? You feed your dog bones under the table, you do not seat him beside you on the high bench.” He pointed a finger at Tyrion’s face. “If Cersei cannot curb the boy, you must. And if these councillors are playing us false …”
“管事。”父亲唐突地说。
Tyrion knew. “Spikes,” he sighed. “Heads. Walls.”
提利昂哈哈大笑。“我亲爱的老姐对此恐怕有意见哟！”
“I see you have taken a few lessons from me.”
“随她去说，总得有人管管她儿子，以免他把我们全部搞垮。我认为这都是那群三心二意的重臣搞的鬼——我们的朋友培提尔、年高德劭的大学士，还有那个少了老二的活宝瓦里斯大人。乔佛里做出一桩又一桩蠢事时，他们都在干什么？到底是谁出的馊主意，竟把这个杰诺斯·史林特拔擢为贵族？这家伙的父亲是个屠夫，而他们竟给了他赫伦堡，赫伦堡！那是国王住的城堡！只要我一息尚存，他就别想踏进去。听说他挑了一支染血长枪作家徽，假如我在，非逼他改成染血的菜刀不可。”父亲并未提高音量，但提利昂从他的金黄眼瞳里体会得出他的愤怒。“他们还赶走了赛尔弥，到底是哪根筋有问题？没错，他是一把年纪了，但‘无畏的巴利斯坦’光这名号在王国就很有份量，他服侍谁，谁就跟着沾光，猎狗起得了这种作用？狗是在桌子底下啃骨头的，不是拿来平起平坐的。”他伸出一根手指，指着提利昂的脸。“既然瑟曦管不了那小鬼，就由你来管。倘若那几个重臣胆敢跟我们耍两面派……”
“More than you know, Father,” Tyrion answered quietly. He finished his wine and set the cup aside, thoughtful. A part of him was more pleased than he cared to admit. Another part was remembering the battle upriver, and wondering if he was being sent to hold the left again. “Why me?” he asked, cocking his head to one side. “Why not my uncle? Why not Ser Addam or Ser Flement or Lord Serrett? Why not a … bigger man?”
提利昂太清楚了。“砍头，”他叹道，“枪尖插着，挂上城墙。”
Lord Tywin rose abruptly. “You are my son.”
“你总算还从我这儿学了点东西。”
That was when he knew. You have given him up for lost , he thought. You bloody bastard, you think Jaime’s good as dead, so I’m all you have left . Tyrion wanted to slap him, to spit in his face, to draw his dagger and cut the heart out of him and see if it was made of old hard gold, the way the smallfolks said. Yet he sat there, silent and still.
“父亲，我学的可多了。”提利昂平静地说。他喝干了酒，若有所思地把杯子放到一边。一方面，他很高兴，高兴到自己不敢承认的地步；另一方面，他又想起了不久前在绿叉河上游打的那场仗，不知自己是否又被派去防守“左翼”。“为什么派我？”他歪头问，“为何不派叔叔？为何不派亚当爵士、佛列蒙爵士或沙略特大人？为何不派……个头大点的人？”
The shards of the broken cup crunched beneath his father’s heels as Lord Tywin crossed the room. “One last thing,” he said at the door. “You will not take the whore to court.”
泰温公爵陡地起身。“因为你是我儿子。”
Tyrion sat alone in the common room for a long while after his father was gone. Finally he climbed the steps to his cozy garret beneath the bell tower. The ceiling was low, but that was scarcely a drawback for a dwarf. From the window, he could see the gibbet his father had erected in the yard. The innkeep’s body turned slowly on its rope whenever the night wind gusted. Her flesh had grown as thin and ragged as Lannister hopes.
他这才明白。原来你已经放弃他了，他心想，你这天杀的王八蛋，你认为詹姆与死无异，所以你只剩下了我。提利昂想一巴掌掴去，想朝他脸上吐口水，想抽出匕首把他的心掏出来，看看究竟是不是如老百姓所说的用黄金铸成。然而最终，他只是静静地坐着，一言不发。
Shae murmured sleepily and rolled toward him when he sat on the edge of the featherbed. He slid his hand under the blanket and cupped a soft breast, and her eyes opened. “M’lord,” she said with a drowsy smile.
泰温公爵穿过房间，碎酒杯在他脚下喀啦作响。“最后一件事，”他走到门边时说，“不准你带那个妓女进宫。”
When he felt her nipple stiffen, Tyrion kissed her. “I have a mind to take you to King’s Landing, sweetling,” he whispered.
父亲离去之后，提利昂在旅店大厅里静坐良久，最后他终于爬上楼梯，回到钟塔下舒适的阁楼房。房间的天花板虽矮，但对侏儒来说并无妨碍。从窗户看出去，他见到父亲在院子里搭的绞刑架，夜风吹起，绳子上老板娘的尸体便晃个不休。她身上的肌肉就和兰尼斯特家的希望一般微薄而破败。
*JON
他回身在羽毛床边坐下，雪伊睡意惺忪地呢喃着，翻身朝向他。他把手伸到棉被下，握住她柔软的乳房，她张开了眼睛。“大人，”她慵懒地微笑。
T he mare whickered softly as Jon Snow tightened the cinch. “Easy, sweet lady,” he said in a soft voice, quieting her with a touch. Wind whispered through the stable, a cold dead breath on his face, but Jon paid it no mind. He strapped his roll to the saddle, his scarred fingers stiff and clumsy. “Ghost,” he called softly, “to me.” And the wolf was there, eyes like embers.
当她的乳头逐渐变硬，提利昂俯身亲吻她。“小宝贝，我真想带你去君临。”他悄声说。
“Jon, please. You must not do this.”
第七十一章 琼恩
He mounted, the reins in his hand, and wheeled the horse around to face the night. Samwell Tarly stood in the stable door, a full moon peering over his shoulder. He threw a giant’s shadow, immense and black. “Get out of my way, Sam.”
琼恩·雪诺扎紧马鞍上的皮带，母马则轻声嘶叫。“好女孩，别怕，”他轻声安抚它。寒风在马厩间细语，宛如迎面袭击来的冰冷死气，但琼恩未加理会。他把铺盖捆上马鞍，结疤的手指僵硬而笨拙。“白灵，”他轻声呼唤，“过来。”狼立刻出现，双眼如两团火烬。
“Jon, you can’t,” Sam said. “I won’t let you.”
“琼恩，求求你，别这样。”
“I would sooner not hurt you,” Jon told him. “Move aside, Sam, or I’ll ride you down.”
他骑上马，握紧缰绳，策马转头，面对黑夜。山姆威尔·塔利站在马厩门口，一轮满月从他肩膀后照进，洒下一道巨人般的影子，硕大而黑暗。“山姆，别挡道。”
“You won’t. You have to listen to me. Please …”
“琼恩，你不能这样一走了之，”山姆说，“我不会放你走。”
Jon put his spurs to horseflesh, and the mare bolted for the door. For an instant Sam stood his ground, his face as round and pale as the moon behind him, his mouth a widening O of surprise. At the last moment, when they were almost on him, he jumped aside as Jon had known he would, stumbled, and fell. The mare leapt over him, out into the night.
“我不想伤害你，”琼恩告诉他，“山姆，你走开，不然我就踩过去。”
Jon raised the hood of his heavy cloak and gave the horse her head. Castle Black was silent and still as he rode out, with Ghost racing at his side. Men watched from the Wall behind him, he knew, but their eyes were turned north, not south. No one would see him go, no one but Sam Tarly, struggling back to his feet in the dust of the old stables. He hoped Sam hadn’t hurt himself, falling like that. He was so heavy and so ungainly, it would be just like him to break a wrist or twist his ankle getting out of the way. “I warned him,” Jon said aloud. “It was nothing to do with him, anyway.” He flexed his burned hand as he rode, opening and closing the scarred fingers. They still pained him, but it felt good to have the wrappings off.
“你不会的。听我说，求求你……”
Moonlight silvered the hills as he followed the twisting ribbon of the kingsroad. He needed to get as far from the Wall as he could before they realized he was gone. On the morrow he would leave the road and strike out overland through field and bush and stream to throw off pursuit, but for the moment speed was more important than deception. It was not as though they would not guess where he was going.
琼恩双脚一踢，母马立即朝门飞奔而去。刹那间，山姆站在原地，脸庞如同身后那轮满月般又圆又白，嘴巴惊讶地张成一个大圆。就在人马即将撞上的最后一刻，他跳了开去，并如琼恩所预料地，步履踉跄，跌倒在地。母马跳过他，冲进黑夜。
The Old Bear was accustomed to rise at first light, so Jon had until dawn to put as many leagues as he could between him and the Wall … if Sam Tarly did not betray him. The fat boy was dutiful and easily frightened, but he loved Jon like a brother. If questioned, Sam would doubtless tell them the truth, but Jon could not imagine him braving the guards in front of the King’s Tower to wake Mormont from sleep.
琼恩掀起厚重斗篷的兜帽，拍拍母马的头。他骑马离开静谧的黑城堡，白灵紧随在旁。他知道身后的长城上有人值守，但他们面朝极北，而非南方。除了正从马厩的泥地上挣扎起身的山姆·塔利，不会有人见到他离去。眼看山姆摔成那样，琼恩暗自希望他没事才好。他那么肥胖，手脚又笨拙，很可能因此摔断手腕，或扭到脚踝。“我警告过他了，”琼恩大声说，“而且本来就不干他的事。”他一边骑，一边活动自己灼伤的手，结疤的指头开开阖阖。疼痛依旧，不过取掉绷带后的感觉真好。
When Jon did not appear to fetch the Old Bear’s breakfast from the kitchen, they’d look in his cell and find Longclaw on the bed. It had been hard to abandon it, but Jon was not so lost to honor as to take it with him. Even Jorah Mormont had not done that, when he fled in disgrace. Doubtless Lord Mormont would find someone more worthy of the blade. Jon felt bad when he thought of the old man. He knew his desertion would be salt in the still-raw wound of his son’s disgrace. That seemed a poor way to repay him for his trust, but it couldn’t be helped. No matter what he did, Jon felt as though he were betraying someone.
他沿着蝴蝶结般蜿蜒的国王大道飞奔，月光将附近的丘陵洒成一片银白。他得在计划被人发觉前尽可能地远离长城。等到明天，他将被迫离开道路，穿越田野、树丛和溪流以摆脱追兵，但眼下速度比掩护更重要。毕竟他的目的地显而易见。
Even now, he did not know if he was doing the honorable thing. The southron had it easier. They had their septons to talk to, someone to tell them the gods’ will and help sort out right from wrong. But the Starks worshiped the old gods, the nameless gods, and if the heart trees heard, they did not speak.
熊老习惯黎明起床，所以琼恩至少还有天亮前的时间，用来尽量拉开与长城间的距离……假定山姆·塔利没有背叛他。胖男孩虽然尽忠职守，且胆子又小，但他把琼恩当亲兄弟看待。若是被人问起，山姆肯定会说出实情，不过琼恩不认为他有那个勇气，敢大半夜去找国王塔的守卫，把莫尔蒙吵醒。
When the last lights of Castle Black vanished behind him, Jon slowed his mare to a walk. He had a long journey ahead and only the one horse to see him through. There were holdfasts and farming villages along the road south where he might be able to trade the mare for a fresh mount when he needed one, but not if she were injured or blown.
等到明天，发现琼恩没去厨房帮熊老端早餐，大家便会到寝室来查找，随后看到孤零零躺在床上的长爪。留下那把宝剑很不容易，但琼恩还不至于恬不知耻地将它带走。就连乔拉·莫尔蒙亡命天涯前，也没有这么做。莫尔蒙司令一定能找到更适合佩带那把剑的人。想起老人，琼恩心里很不好受。他知道自己这样弃营逃跑，无异是在总司令丧子之痛上洒盐。想到他对自己如此信任，这实在是忘恩负义的作法，但他别无选择。不管怎么做，琼恩都会背叛某个人。
He would need to find new clothes soon; most like, he’d need to steal them. He was clad in black from head to heel; high leather riding boots, roughspun breeches and tunic, sleeveless leather jerkin, and heavy wool cloak. His longsword and dagger were sheathed in black moleskin, and the hauberk and coif in his saddlebag were black ringmail. Any bit of it could mean his death if he were taken. A stranger wearing black was viewed with cold suspicion in every village and holdfast north of the Neck, and men would soon be watching for him. Once Maester Aemon’s ravens took flight, Jon knew he would find no safe haven. Not even at Winterfell. Bran might want to let him in, but Maester Luwin had better sense. He would bar the gates and send Jon away, as he should. Better not to call there at all.
即使到了现在，他依旧不知自己的做法是否荣誉。南方人的作派比较简单，他们有修士可供咨询，由他们传达诸神意旨，协助理清对错。然而史塔克家族信奉的是无名古神，心树就算听见了，也不会言语。
Yet he saw the castle clear in his mind’s eye, as if he had left it only yesterday; the towering granite walls, the Great Hall with its smells of smoke and dog and roasting meat, his father’s solar, the turret room where he had slept. Part of him wanted nothing so much as to hear Bran laugh again, to sup on one of Gage’s beef-and-bacon pies, to listen to Old Nan tell her tales of the children of the forest and Florian the Fool.
当黑城堡的最后一丝灯火消失在身后，琼恩便放慢速度，让母马缓步而行。眼前还有漫漫长路，他却只有这匹马可供依凭。往南的路上，沿途都有村庄农舍，如有必要，他可以和他们交换新的马匹，不过若是母马受伤或瘫倒在地就不成了。
But he had not left the Wall for that; he had left because he was after all his father’s son, and Robb’s brother. The gift of a sword, even a sword as fine as Longclaw, did not make him a Mormont. Nor was he Aemon Targaryen. Three times the old man had chosen, and three times he had chosen honor, but that was him. Even now, Jon could not decide whether the maester had stayed because he was weak and craven, or because he was strong and true. Yet he understood what the old man had meant, about the pain of choosing; he understood that all too well.
他得尽快找到新衣服，恐怕还只能去偷。眼下的他从头到脚都是黑色：高统黑皮革马靴，粗布黑长裤黑外衣，无袖黑皮革背心，厚重的黑羊毛披风。长剑和匕首包在黑鞘里，鞍袋里则是黑环甲和头盔。如果他被捕，这每一件都足以致他于死地。在颈泽以北，任何穿黑衣的陌生人进了村舍庄园，都会被投以冷漠的怀疑眼光，并遭到监视。而一旦伊蒙师傅的渡鸦送出消息，自己便再也找不到容身之所，即便临冬城也一样。布兰或许会放他进城，但鲁温师傅很清楚该怎么做，他会履行职责，关上城门，把琼恩赶走。所以，打一开始他就没动临冬城的主意。
Tyrion Lannister had claimed that most men would rather deny a hard truth than face it, but Jon was done with denials. He was who he was; Jon Snow, bastard and oathbreaker, motherless, friendless, and damned. For the rest of his life—however long that might be—he would be condemned to be an outsider, the silent man standing in the shadows who dares not speak his true name. Wherever he might go throughout the Seven Kingdoms, he would need to live a lie, lest every man’s hand be raised against him. But it made no matter, so long as he lived long enough to take his place by his brother’s side and help avenge his father.
虽然如此，在他脑海里，却能清晰地见到城堡的影像，仿佛昨天才刚离开：高耸的大理石墙；香气四溢、烟雾弥漫的城堡大厅，里面到处是乱跑的狗；父亲的书房；自己在塔楼上的卧室。在他心底的某一部分，只想再瞧瞧布兰的欢笑，再吃一个盖奇做的牛肉培根派，再听老奶妈说关于森林之子和傻瓜佛罗理安的故事。
He remembered Robb as he had last seen him, standing in the yard with snow melting in his auburn hair. Jon would have to come to him in secret, disguised. He tried to imagine the look on Robb’s face when he revealed himself. His brother would shake his head and smile, and he’d say … he’d say …
可是，他并非因为这些才离开长城：他之所以离开，只因为他是父亲的儿子，罗柏的兄弟。他不会因为别人送他一把剑，即便像长爪那么好的剑，就变成莫尔蒙家族的人。他也不是伊蒙·坦格利安。老人做了三次抉择，三次都选择了荣誉，但那是他。即便现在，琼恩还是不敢确定，老学士做出那样的选择，究竟是因为懦弱无力，还是因为心地坚强、忠于职守。但无论如何，他了解老人的困惑，关于抉择的痛苦，他太了解了。
He could not see the smile. Hard as he tried, he could not see it. He found himself thinking of the deserter his father had beheaded the day they’d found the direwolves. “You said the words,” Lord Eddard had told him. “You took a vow, before your brothers, before the old gods and the new.” Desmond and Fat Tom had dragged the man to the stump. Bran’s eyes had been wide as saucers, and Jon had to remind him to keep his pony in hand. He remembered the look on Father’s face when Theon Greyjoy brought forth Ice, the spray of blood on the snow, the way Theon had kicked the head when it came rolling at his feet.
提利昂·兰尼斯特曾说：多数人宁可否认事实，也不愿面对真相，但琼恩已经想透了种种磨难。他清楚地知道自己是谁：他是琼恩·雪诺，不但是私生子，更是背离誓约的逃兵，既无母亲，亦无朋友，将遭天谴。终其一生——不论他这一生能有多长——都将被迫流浪，成为阴影中沉默的孤民，不敢说出真名。无论走到七国何处，必将生活在谎言之中，否则别人会对他群起而攻之。但是，只要他能与兄弟并肩作战，为父亲报仇雪恨，所有这些都无足轻重。
He wondered what Lord Eddard might have done if the deserter had been his brother Benjen instead of that ragged stranger. Would it have been any different? It must, surely, surely … and Robb would welcome him, for a certainty. He had to, or else …
他记得自己最后一次见到罗柏的情景。当时罗柏站在广场上，红褐头发间雪花融化。如今琼恩可能必须易容之后，才能偷偷去见他。他试着想像当自己揭开真面目时，罗柏脸上会是什么表情。他的兄弟会摇摇头，面露微笑，然后他说……他会说……
It did not bear thinking about. Pain throbbed, deep in his fingers, as he clutched the reins. Jon put his heels into his horse and broke into a gallop, racing down the kingsroad, as if to outrun his doubts. Jon was not afraid of death, but he did not want to die like that, trussed and bound and beheaded like a common brigand. If he must perish, let it be with a sword in his hand, fighting his father’s killers. He was no true Stark, had never been one … but he could die like one. Let them say that Eddard Stark had fathered four sons, not three.
他拼凑不出那抹微笑，无论怎么努力，就是想不出来。他反而不自觉地想起他们找到冰原狼那天，被父亲砍头的逃兵。“你立下了誓言，”艾德公爵告诉那人，“你在你的弟兄们以及新旧诸神面前立下了誓约。”戴斯蒙和胖汤姆把逃兵拖到木桩前。布兰的眼睛睁得像盘子，琼恩还特意提醒他别让小马乱动。他忆起当席恩·葛雷乔伊递上寒冰时，父亲脸上的表情，随后又想起鲜血溅落雪地，席恩扬腿把人头踢到他脚边。
Ghost kept pace with them for almost half a mile, red tongue lolling from his mouth. Man and horse alike lowered their heads as he asked the mare for more speed. The wolf slowed, stopped, watching, his eyes glowing red in the moonlight. He vanished behind, but Jon knew he would follow, at his own pace.
他不禁想，假如逃兵是艾德公爵的亲弟弟班扬，而非一个衣着破烂的陌生人，他会怎么做？两者会有差别吗？一定会，一定会的，一定……毫无疑问，罗柏也一定会欢迎他。他怎么可能不欢迎他呢？除非……
Scattered lights flickered through the trees ahead of him, on both sides of the road: Mole’s Town. A dog barked as he rode through, and he heard a mule’s raucous haw from the stable, but otherwise the village was still. Here and there the glow of hearth fires shone through shuttered windows, leaking between wooden slats, but only a few.
还是别多想的好。他握紧缰绳，手指隐隐作痛。琼恩再度夹紧马肚，顺着国王大道疾驰，仿佛要驱离心中的疑惑。琼恩不怕死，但他不要这种被五花大绑，像个寻常强盗般斩首示众的死法。倘若他非死不可，他甘愿手握利剑，死在与杀父仇人的决斗中。他生来就不是真正的史塔克族人，从来不是……但他可以死得像个史塔克。就让大家都知道艾德·史塔克膝下不只三个儿子，而是四个。
Mole’s Town was bigger than it seemed, but three quarters of it was under the ground, in deep warm cellars connected by a maze of tunnels. Even the whorehouse was down there, nothing on the surface but a wooden shack no bigger than a privy, with a red lantern hung over the door. On the Wall, he’d heard men call the whores “buried treasures.” He wondered whether any of his brothers in black were down there tonight, mining. That was oathbreaking too, yet no one seemed to care.
白灵跟着他的速度跑了一里，红红的舌头伸在嘴巴外悬荡。他催马加速，人马低头飞奔。冰原狼则放慢脚步，停了下来，左顾右盼，眼睛在月色中闪着红光。不久，他消失在后方，琼恩知道他会按自己的步调跟随。
Not until he was well beyond the village did Jon slow again. By then both he and the mare were damp with sweat. He dismounted, shivering, his burned hand aching. A bank of melting snow lay under the trees, bright in the moonlight, water trickling off to form small shallow pools. Jon squatted and brought his hands together, cupping the runoff between his fingers. The snowmelt was icy cold. He drank, and splashed some on his face, until his cheeks tingled. His fingers were throbbing worse than they had in days, and his head was pounding too. I am doing the right thing , he told himself, so why do I feel so bad?
前方的道路两旁，摇曳的灯火穿过树林照过来。这里是鼹鼠村。他催马奔过，听到一阵狗吠，以及马厩里传来的驴叫，除此之外，村子悄然无声。有几处炉火微光从禁闭的窗户中穿透而出，或自房舍木板间流泄出来，但寥寥无几。
The horse was well lathered, so Jon took the lead and walked her for a while. The road was scarcely wide enough for two riders to pass abreast, its surface cut by tiny streams and littered with stone. That run had been truly stupid, an invitation to a broken neck. Jon wondered what had gotten into him. Was he in such a great rush to die?
其实鼹鼠村比乍看之下要大得多，只是四分之三的部分位于地底，由一个个既深且暖的地窖组成，经由错综复杂的隧道彼此衔接。就连妓院也在地下，从地面上看，它们只是比厕所大不了多少的小木屋，门上挂了盏红灯笼。长城上守军把妓女们叫做“地底的宝藏”，他不禁揣测今晚有多少黑衣弟兄在下面挖宝呢？这当然也算是一种背誓，只是无人在意。
Off in the trees, the distant scream of some frightened animal made him look up. His mare whinnied nervously. Had his wolf found some prey? He cupped his hands around his mouth. “Ghost!” he shouted. “Ghost, to me.” The only answer was a rush of wings behind him as an owl took flight.
直到把村子远远地抛在后面，琼恩方才再次减速。这时，他和母马都已经满身大汗。于是他跳下马背，只觉浑身发抖，灼伤的手更是疼痛。树丛下有大堆融雪，在月光下映射发亮，涓滴细流从中淌出，汇聚成浅浅的小池。琼恩蹲下来，双手合掌，捧起雪水。融雪冰冷刺骨，他喝了几口，接着洗脸，直洗得两颊发麻。他感觉到头昏脑胀，手指也好几天没有痛得这么厉害。我做得没错，他告诉自己，可我为何这么难受？
Frowning, Jon continued on his way. He led the mare for half an hour, until she was dry. Ghost did not appear. Jon wanted to mount up and ride again, but he was concerned about his missing wolf. “Ghost,” he called again. “Where are you? To me! Ghost!” Nothing in these woods could trouble a direwolf, even a half-grown direwolf, unless … no, Ghost was too smart to attack a bear, and if there was a wolf pack anywhere close Jon would have surely heard them howling.
马儿仍旧气喘吁吁，于是琼恩牵它走了一段。道路很窄，只能勉强容两人并肩而骑，表面更被细小沟渠所切割，布满碎石。刚才那样狂奔委实愚蠢，分明就是自找麻烦，稍不小心就会摔断脖子。琼恩不禁纳闷，自己究竟怎么搞的？就这么急着寻死么？
He should eat, he decided. Food would settle his stomach and give Ghost the chance to catch up. There was no danger yet; Castle Black still slept. In his saddlebag, he found a biscuit, a piece of cheese, and a small withered brown apple. He’d brought salt beef as well, and a rasher of bacon he’d filched from the kitchens, but he would save the meat for the morrow. After it was gone he’d need to hunt, and that would slow him.
远方的树林里传来动物的受惊尖叫，他立刻抬头，母马也不安地哼着。是他的狼找到猎物了？他把手环在嘴边，“白灵！”他叫道，“白灵！到我这儿来！”但惟一的回应只是身后某只猫头鹰振翅高飞的声响。
Jon sat under the trees and ate his biscuit and cheese while his mare grazed along the kingsroad. He kept the apple for last. It had gone a little soft, but the flesh was still tart and juicy. He was down to the core when he heard the sounds: horses, and from the north. Quickly Jon leapt up and strode to his mare. Could he outrun them? No, they were too close, they’d hear him for a certainty, and if they were from Castle Black …
琼恩皱起眉头，继续上路。他牵马走了半小时，直到它身上干透为止。但白灵始终没有出现。琼恩想上马赶路，却又担心不知去向的狼。“白灵，”他再度叫喊，“你在哪里？快过来！白灵！”这片林子里应该没什么能威胁到冰原狼——就算这只冰原狼尚未发育完全也罢，除非……不，白灵绝不会蠢到去攻击熊，而假使这附近有狼群，琼恩也一定能听见它们的嚎叫。
He led the mare off the road, behind a thick stand of grey-green sentinels. “Quiet now,” he said in a hushed voice, crouching down to peer through the branches. If the gods were kind, the riders would pass by. Likely as not, they were only smallfolk from Mole’s Town, farmers on their way to their fields, although what they were doing out in the middle of the night …
最后他决定先吃点东西再说。食物可以稍微安抚脾胃，更能多给白灵一点时间跟上。此时尚无危险，黑城堡依然在沉睡中。于是他从鞍袋里找出一块饼干，一小片乳酪和一个干瘪的褐色苹果。他还带了腌牛肉，以及从厨房偷来的一片培根，但他想把肉留到明天。因为等食物没了，他就得自己打猎，而那一定会拖延他的行程。
He listened to the sound of hooves growing steadily louder as they trotted briskly down the kingsroad. From the sound, there were five or six of them at the least. Their voices drifted through the trees.
琼恩坐在树下，吃着饼干和乳酪，任母马沿着国王大道吃草。他把苹果留到最后，虽然摸起来有些软，果肉仍然酸甜多汁。听到声音时，他正在啃果核：是蹄声，从北方来。琼恩一跃而起，奔向母马。跑得掉吗？不，距离太近，一定会暴露声音，何况假如他们从黑城堡来……
“… certain he came this way?”
于是他牵着母马离开大路，走到一丛浓密的灰青色哨兵树后。“别出声喔。”他悄声说，一边蹲伏下来，透过树枝缝隙向外窥视。倘若诸神保佑，对方就会不经意地骑马跑过。八成鼹鼠村的农民，正返回自己的田地，可他们干嘛大半夜的走呢？……
“We can’t be certain.”
他静静呤听，蹄声沿着国王大道急速而来，步伐坚定，逐渐增大。依声音判断，大概有五六个人。对方的话音在林木间穿梭。
“He could have ridden east, for all you know. Or left the road to cut through the woods. That’s what I’d do.”
“……确定他走这边？”
“In the dark? Stupid. If you didn’t fall off your horse and break your neck, you’d get lost and wind up back at the Wall when the sun came up.”
“当然不确定。”
“I would not.” Grenn sounded peeved. “I’d just ride south, you can tell south by the stars.”
“搞不好他朝东去了。或是离开道路，穿越树林。换了我就会这么做。”
“What if the sky was cloudy?” Pyp asked.
“在这一团漆黑的晚上？你别傻了。就算没摔下马来，折了脖子，辨不清路乱走，等太阳升起大概也绕回长城了。”
“Then I wouldn’t go.”
“我才不会，”葛兰听起来很气愤。“我会往南骑，看星星就知道哪边是南方。”
Another voice broke in. “You know where I’d be if it was me? I’d be in Mole’s Town, digging for buried treasure.” Toad’s shrill laughter boomed through the trees. Jon’s mare snorted.
“要是被云遮住呢？”派普问。
“Keep quiet, all of you,” Halder said. “I thought I heard something.”
“那我就不走。”
“Where? I didn’t hear anything.” The horses stopped.
又一个声音插进来。“换作是我，你们知道我会怎么做？我会直接去鼹鼠村挖宝。”陶德尖锐的笑声在林间回响，琼恩的母马哼了一声。
“You can’t hear yourself fart.”
“你们通通给我闭嘴，”霍德说，“我好像听到了什么。”
“I can too,” Grenn insisted.
“在哪儿？我啥都没听见。”蹄声停止。
“Quiet!”
“你连自己放屁都听不见。”
They all fell silent, listening. Jon found himself holding his breath. Sam , he thought. He hadn’t gone to the Old Bear, but he hadn’t gone to bed either, he’d woken the other boys. Damn them all. Come dawn, if they were not in their beds, they’d be named deserters too. What did they think they were doing?
“我听得见啦。”葛兰坚持。
The hushed silence seemed to stretch on and on. From where Jon crouched, he could see the legs of their horses through the branches. Finally Pyp spoke up. “What did you hear?”
“闭嘴！”
“I don’t know,” Halder admitted. “A sound, I thought it might have been a horse but …”
于是他们都安静下来，凝神倾听。琼恩不自觉地屏住呼吸。一定是山姆，他心想。他既没去找熊老，也没上床睡觉，而是叫醒了其他几个男孩。真要命，若是天亮前他们还未归营，也会被当成逃兵处理。他们到底在想什么呀？
“There’s nothing here.”
寂静无限延伸。从琼恩蹲的地方，透过树丛，可以看到他们坐骑的脚。最后派普开口道：“你刚才到底听到什么？”
Out of the corner of his eye, Jon glimpsed a pale shape moving through the trees. Leaves rustled, and Ghost came bounding out of the shadows, so suddenly that Jon’s mare started and gave a whinny. “There!” Halder shouted.
“我也不知道。”霍德承认，“但的确有什么声音，我认为是马叫，可……”
“I heard it too!”
“这儿什么声音都没有啊。”
“Traitor,” Jon told the direwolf as he swung up into the saddle. He turned the mare’s head to slide off through the trees, but they were on him before he had gone ten feet.
琼恩的眼角余光瞥见一个白色影子在林间窜动。树叶窸窣抖动，白灵从阴影中跑了出来，由于来得突然，琼恩的母马不禁轻声惊叫。“在那里！”霍德大叫。
“Jon!” Pyp shouted after him.
“我也听到了！”
“Pull up,” Grenn said. “You can’t outrun us all.”
“我被你害死了。”琼恩一边翻身上马，一边对冰原狼说。他调转马头，往森林走去，但不出十尺，他们便追了上来。
Jon wheeled around to face them, drawing his sword. “Get back. I don’t wish to hurt you, but I will if I have to.”
“琼恩！”派普在身后喊。
“One against seven?” Halder gave a signal. The boys spread out, surrounding him.
“停下来，”葛兰说，“你跑不掉的。”
“What do you want with me?” Jon demanded.
琼恩抽出佩剑，策马旋身。“通通退后。我不想伤害你们，但如果情非得已，我会动手的。”
“We want to take you back where you belong,” Pyp said.
“你想以一对七？”霍德挥手，男孩们一拥而上，将他团团围住。
“I belong with my brother.”
“你们要拿我怎样？”琼恩质问。
“We’re your brothers now,” Grenn said.
“我们要把你带回属于你的地方。”派普说。
“They’ll cut off your head if they catch you, you know,” Toad put in with a nervous laugh. “This is so stupid, it’s like something the Aurochs would do.”
“我属于我的兄弟。”
“I would not,” Grenn said. “I’m no oathbreaker. I said the words and I meant them.”
“我们就是你的兄弟。”葛兰说。
“So did I,” Jon told them. “Don’t you understand? They murdered my father . It’s war, my brother Robb is fighting in the riverlands—”
“他们逮到你，你会被砍头的，知道吗？”陶德紧张地笑笑，“这么笨的事，只有笨牛才做得出来。”
“We know,” said Pyp solemnly. “Sam told us everything.”
我才不会呢。”葛兰道：“我不会违背誓言，我发过誓，说话算话的。”
“We’re sorry about your father,” Grenn said, “but it doesn’t matter. Once you say the words, you can’t leave, no matter what.”
“我也一样，”琼恩告诉他们，“可你们难道不懂么？他们谋害了我父亲！这是一场战争，我兄弟罗柏正在河间地作战——”
“I have to,” Jon said fervently.
“我们都知道，”派普严肃地说，“山姆跟我们说了。”
“You said the words,” Pyp reminded him. “Now my watch begins , you said it. It shall not end until my death.”
“你父亲的事我们很遗憾，”葛兰说，“但那与你无关。一旦发了誓，你就不能离开，不管怎样都不行。”
“I shall live and die at my post,” Grenn added, nodding.
“我非走不可。”琼恩激动地说。
“You don’t have to tell me the words, I know them as well as you do.” He was angry now. Why couldn’t they let him go in peace? They were only making it harder.
“你发过誓了。”派普提醒他，“我从今开始守望，至死方休，你是不是这么说的？”
“I am the sword in the darkness,” Halder intoned.
“我将尽忠职守，生死于斯。”葛兰点头附和。
“The watcher on the walls,” piped Toad.
“用不着你们告诉我，我跟你们背得一样熟。”这下他真的生气了。他们为何不能干脆一点，放他走呢？这样子大家都不好过。
Jon cursed them all to their faces. They took no notice. Pyp spurred his horse closer, reciting, “I am the fire that burns against the cold, the light that brings the dawn, the horn that wakes the sleepers, the shield that guards the realms of men.”
“我是黑暗中的利剑。”霍德诵道。
“Stay back,” Jon warned him, brandishing his sword. “I mean it, Pyp.” They weren’t even wearing armor, he could cut them to pieces if he had to.
“长城上的守卫。”癞蛤蟆跟着念。
Matthar had circled behind him. He joined the chorus. “I pledge my life and honor to the Night’s Watch.”
琼恩开始一个一个咒骂他们，但他们置之不理。派普催马上前，继续背诵：“抵御寒冷的烈焰，破晓时分的光线，唤醒眠者的号角，守护王国的坚盾。”
Jon kicked his mare, spinning her in a circle. The boys were all around him now, closing from every side.
“别过来，”琼恩挥剑警告他，“派普，我是说真的。”他们连护甲都没穿，假如真的动手，他可以把他们统统砍成碎片。
“For this night …,” Halder trotted in from the left.
梅沙绕到他身后，加入了念诵：“我将生命与荣耀献给守夜人。”
“… and all the nights to come,” finished Pyp. He reached over for Jon’s reins. “So here are your choices. Kill me, or come back with me.”
琼恩双脚一踢，调转马头。然而男孩们已将他彻底包围，步步逼近。
Jon lifted his sword … and lowered it, helpless. “Damn you,” he said. “Damn you all.”
“今夜如此……”霍德堵住了左边的缺口。
“Do we have to bind your hands, or will you give us your word you’ll ride back peaceful?” asked Halder.
“……夜夜皆然。”派普说完最后一句，伸手抓住琼恩的缰绳。“你有两个选择：要么杀了我，要么跟我回去。”
“I won’t run, if that’s what you mean.” Ghost moved out from under the trees and Jon glared at him. “Small help you were,” he said. The deep red eyes looked at him knowingly.
琼恩举起长剑……最后还是无助地放了下来。“去你的，”他说，“你们通通该死。”
“We had best hurry,” Pyp said. “If we’re not back before first light, the Old Bear will have all our heads.”
“我们该不该把你的手绑起来？你愿不愿乖乖回去呢？”霍德问。
Of the ride back, Jon Snow remembered little. It seemed shorter than the journey south, perhaps because his mind was elsewhere. Pyp set the pace, galloping, walking, trotting, and then breaking into another gallop. Mole’s Town came and went, the red lantern over the brothel long extinguished. They made good time. Dawn was still an hour off when Jon glimpsed the towers of Castle Black ahead of them, dark against the pale immensity of the Wall. It did not seem like home this time.
“我不跑便是。”这时白灵从树下跑出来，琼恩瞪着他，“你可真会帮倒忙。”他说，但那双深沉的红眼却仿若洞悉一切地看着他。
They could take him back, Jon told himself, but they could not make him stay. The war would not end on the morrow, or the day after, and his friends could not watch him day and night. He would bide his time, make them think he was content to remain here … and then, when they had grown lax, he would be off again. Next time he would avoid the kingsroad. He could follow the Wall east, perhaps all the way to the sea, a longer route but a safer one. Or even west, to the mountains, and then south over the high passes. That was the wildling’s way, hard and perilous, but at least no one would follow him. He wouldn’t stray within a hundred leagues of Winterfell or the kingsroad.
“我们最好赶快，”派普道，“假如天亮前回不去，只怕熊老会把我们的头通通砍了。”
Samwell Tarly awaited them in the old stables, slumped on the ground against a bale of hay, too anxious to sleep. He rose and brushed himself off. “I … I’m glad they found you, Jon.”
回程途中发生过什么，琼恩·雪诺记得不多，只觉这趟路似乎比南行短暂得多，或许是他心不在焉的缘故罢。派普带队，不时飞奔，慢走，小跑，接着又恢复奔驰。鼹鼠村来了又去，妓院门口悬着的红灯早已熄灭。派普把时间掌握得很好，距离天亮刚好还有一个小时，琼恩见到黑城堡的黑塔楼出现在前方，衬着背后硕大无朋的苍白长城。只是这回，城堡再也没了家的感觉。
“I’m not,” Jon said, dismounting.
他们可以抓他回去，琼恩告诉自己，但他们无法留住他。南方的战争不是一两天就能解决的事，而他的朋友不可能日夜都守着他。他只需耐心等待时机，让他们放松警惕，以为他心甘情愿留下来……然后就再度逃走。下一次，他不走国王大道，而是沿着长城东行，或许就这么一直走到海边，然后往南翻越崇山峻岭。那是野人们常走的路，崎岖难行，危机四伏，却足以摆脱追兵。从始至终，他与国王大道和临冬城都将保持一百里格以上的距离。
Pyp hopped off his horse and looked at the lightening sky with disgust. “Give us a hand bedding down the horses, Sam,” the small boy said. “We have a long day before us, and no sleep to face it on, thanks to Lord Snow.”
老旧的马房里，山姆威尔·塔利正等着他们。他坐在泥地上，靠着一堆稻草，紧张得睡不着。一见他们，他立刻起身，拍拍尘土道：“琼恩，我……我很高兴他们找到你了。”
When day broke, Jon walked to the kitchens as he did every dawn. Three-Finger Hobb said nothing as he gave him the Old Bear’s breakfast. Today it was three brown eggs boiled hard, with fried bread and ham steak and a bowl of wrinkled plums. Jon carried the food back to the King’s Tower. He found Mormont at the window seat, writing. His raven was walking back and forth across his shoulders, muttering, “Corn, corn, corn.” The bird shrieked when Jon entered. “Put the food on the table,” the Old Bear said, glancing up. “I’ll have some beer.”
“我可不高兴。”琼恩说着下马。
Jon opened a shuttered window, took the flagon of beer off the outside ledge, and filled a horn. Hobb had given him a lemon, still cold from the Wall. Jon crushed it in his fist. The juice trickled through his fingers. Mormont drank lemon in his beer every day, and claimed that was why he still had his own teeth.
派普也跳下坐骑，一脸嫌恶地望着逐渐泛白的天空。“山姆，帮个忙，把马儿安顿好。”矮个男孩说，“这一天还长着呢，可咱们半点觉都没睡成，这都得感谢雪诺大人。”
“Doubtless you loved your father,” Mormont said when Jon brought him his horn. “The things we love destroy us every time, lad. Remember when I told you that?”
天亮之后，琼恩像往常一样走进厨房。三指哈布把熊老的早餐交给他，什么也没说。今天的早餐包括三颗褐色的白煮蛋，油炸面包，火腿肉片以及一碗有些皱的李子。琼恩端着东西回到国王塔，发现莫尔蒙正坐在窗边写东西。乌鸦在他肩膀上来回踱步，边走边念：“玉米！玉米！玉米！”琼恩一进房间，乌鸦便提声尖叫。“把早餐放桌上。”熊老抬头道，“我还想喝点啤酒。”
“I remember,” Jon said sullenly. He did not care to talk of his father’s death, not even to Mormont.
琼恩打开一扇紧闭的窗户，从外面的窗台上拿了啤酒瓶，倒满一角杯。之前哈布给了他一个刚从长城储藏室里拿出来的柠檬，现下还是冰的。琼恩用拳头捏破它，果汁从指缝间滴下。莫尔蒙每天都喝掺柠檬的啤酒，宣称这是他依旧一口好牙的原因。
“See that you never forget it. The hard truths are the ones to hold tight. Fetch me my plate. Is it ham again? So be it. You look weary. Was your moonlight ride so tiring?”
“你一定很爱你父亲，”琼恩将角杯端给他时，莫尔蒙开口：“孩子，我们爱什么，到头来就会毁在什么上面，你还记不记得我跟你说过这话？”
Jon’s throat was dry. “You know?”
“记得。”琼恩面带愠色地说。他不想谈父亲遇害的事，即便对莫尔蒙也不行。
“Know,” the raven echoed from Mormont’s shoulder. “Know.”
“你要仔细记好，别忘记。残酷的事实是最应该牢牢记住的。把我的盘子端过来。又是火腿？算了，我认了。你没什么精神。怎么，昨晚骑马就这么累啊？”
The Old Bear snorted. “Do you think they chose me Lord Commander of the Night’s Watch because I’m dumb as a stump, Snow? Aemon told me you’d go. I told him you’d be back. I know my men … and my boys too. Honor set you on the kingsroad … and honor brought you back.”
琼恩喉咙一干，“您知道？”
“My friends brought me back,” Jon said.
“知道！”莫尔蒙肩头的乌鸦应和，“知道！”
“Did I say it was your honor?” Mormont inspected his plate.
熊老哼了一声。“雪诺，他们选我当守夜人军团总司令，莫非因为我是个呆头鹅？伊蒙说你一定会走，我则告诉他你一定会回来。我了解我的部下……也了解我的孩子们。荣誉心驱使你踏上国王大道……荣誉心也将你鞭策回来。”
“They killed my father. Did you expect me to do nothing?”
“带我回来的是我朋友们。”琼恩说。
“If truth be told, we expected you to do just as you did.” Mormont tried a plum, spit out the pit. “I ordered a watch kept over you. You were seen leaving. If your brothers had not fetched you back, you would have been taken along the way, and not by friends. Unless you have a horse with wings like a raven. Do you?”
“我指的就是‘你的’荣誉心么？”莫尔蒙检视着眼前的餐盘。
“No.” Jon felt like a fool.
“他们杀害了我父亲，难道我应该置之不理？”
“Pity, we could use a horse like that.”
“说真的，你的行为不出我们所料。”莫尔蒙咬了口李子，吐出果核。“我专派了一个人看守你，知道你何时离开。即便你的弟兄们没把你追回来，你也会在途中被逮住。到时候，抓你的可就不是朋友了。哼，除非你的马像乌鸦，生了翅膀。你有这样的马吗？”
Jon stood tall. He told himself that he would die well; that much he could do, at the least. “I know the penalty for desertion, my lord. I’m not afraid to die.”
“没有。”琼恩觉得自己像傻瓜。
“Die!” the raven cried.
“真可惜。我们倒急需那样的马。”
“Nor live, I hope,” Mormont said, cutting his ham with a dagger and feeding a bite to the bird. “You have not deserted—yet. Here you stand. If we beheaded every boy who rode to Mole’s Town in the night, only ghosts would guard the Wall. Yet maybe you mean to flee again on the morrow, or a fortnight from now. Is that it? Is that your hope, boy?”
琼恩挺直身子。他已经对自己说过，要死得有尊严，至少，他能做到这点。“大人，我知道逃营的惩罚。我不怕死。”
Jon kept silent.
“死！”乌鸦叫道。
“I thought so.” Mormont peeled the shell off a boiled egg. “Your father is dead, lad. Do you think you can bring him back?”
“我希望你也别怕继续活下去。”莫尔蒙边说边用匕首切开火腿，还拿一小块喂乌鸦。“你不算逃兵——因为你没走成。眼下你不就好端端站在这里？要是我把每个半夜溜到鼹鼠村的孩子都抓来砍头，那防守长城的就只剩鬼魂了。不过呢，或许你打算明天再跑，或许再隔两个星期。是不是？小子，你有没有这样想？”
“No,” he answered, sullen.
琼恩默不作声。
“Good,” Mormont said. “We’ve seen the dead come back, you and me, and it’s not something I care to see again.” He ate the egg in two bites and flicked a bit of shell out from between his teeth. “Your brother is in the field with all the power of the north behind him. Any one of his lords bannermen commands more swords than you’ll find in all the Night’s Watch. Why do you imagine that they need your help? Are you such a mighty warrior, or do you carry a grumkin in your pocket to magic up your sword?”
“我就知道。”莫尔蒙剥开白煮蛋的壳，“小子，你父亲死了，你有办法让他起死回生吗？”
Jon had no answer for him. The raven was pecking at an egg, breaking the shell. Pushing his beak through the hole, he pulled out morsels of white and yoke.
“没有。”他闷闷不乐地回答。
The Old Bear sighed. “You are not the only one touched by this war. Like as not, my sister is marching in your brother’s host, her and those daughters of hers, dressed in men’s mail. Maege is a hoary old snark, stubborn, short-tempered, and willful. Truth be told, I can hardly stand to be around the wretched woman, but that does not mean my love for her is any less than the love you bear your half sisters.” Frowning, Mormont took his last egg and squeezed it in his fist until the shell crunched. “Or perhaps it does. Be that as it may, I’d still grieve if she were slain, yet you don’t see me running off. I said the words, just as you did. My place is here … where is yours, boy?”
“那敢情好。”莫尔蒙道，“你我都见识过死人复活是什么样，我可不想再碰上那种事。”他两大口吞下煮蛋，从齿缝间吐出几片蛋壳。“你的兄弟虽然上了战场，但他身后有全北境的军力，随便他哪一个封臣手下的士兵都比整个守夜人军团的人加起来还多，你觉得他们会需要你的帮助？难道说你真那么厉害，还是说你随身带着古灵精怪，帮你的剑附加魔法？”
I have no place , Jon wanted to say, I’m a bastard, I have no rights, no name, no mother, and now not even a father . The words would not come. “I don’t know.”
琼恩无话可说。乌鸦啄着一颗蛋，穿破蛋壳，将长长的喙伸进去，拉出丝丝蛋白和蛋黄。
“I do,” said Lord Commander Mormont. “The cold winds are rising, Snow. Beyond the Wall, the shadows lengthen. Cotter Pyke writes of vast herds of elk, streaming south and east toward the sea, and mammoths as well. He says one of his men discovered huge, misshapen footprints not three leagues from Eastwatch. Rangers from the Shadow Tower have found whole villages abandoned, and at night Ser Denys says they see fires in the mountains, huge blazes that burn from dusk till dawn. Quorin Halfhand took a captive in the depths of the Gorge, and the man swears that Mance Rayder is massing all his people in some new, secret stronghold he’s found, to what end the gods only know. Do you think your uncle Benjen was the only ranger we’ve lost this past year?”
熊老叹道：“你也不是惟一被战争波及的人。依我看，我妹妹此刻也应该带着她那群女儿，穿着男人的盔甲，加入你兄弟的军队去了南方。梅格是个上了年纪的老怪物，个性固执，脾气又差，说实话，我根本受不了那糟女人，但这并不代表我对她的感情不如你爱你的异母妹妹。”莫尔蒙皱着眉头拾起最后一颗蛋，用力握住，直到外壳碎裂。“或许不如你。但总之，她若在战场上被杀，我一定很难过，可你瞧，我并没打算逃跑。因为我和你一样都发过誓，我的职责所在是这里……你呢，孩子？”
“Ben Jen,” the raven squawked, bobbing its head, bits of egg dribbling from its beak. “Ben Jen. Ben Jen.”
我无家可归，琼恩想说，我是个私生子，没有权利、没有姓氏、没有母亲，现在连父亲都没了。可他说不出口。“我不知道。”
“No,” Jon said. There had been others. Too many.
“可我知道，”莫尔蒙总司令说，“雪诺，冷风正要吹起，长城之外，阴影日长。卡特·派克的来信中提到大群麇鹿向东南沿海迁徙，之外还有长毛象。他还说，他有个部下在距离东海望仅三里格的地方发现了巨大的畸形脚印。影子塔的游骑兵则回报，长城外有好些村落完全被遗弃，到了晚上，丹尼斯爵士说能看到群山中的火光，大把大把的烈焰，从黄昏直烧到天亮。‘断掌’科林在大峡谷抓到了一个野人，对方发誓说曼斯·雷德正躲在一个新的秘密要塞里，召集属下所有臣民，至于他的目的为何，我看只有天上诸神知道。你以为你叔叔班扬是这几年来我们惟一失去的游骑兵么？”
“Do you think your brother’s war is more important than ours?” the old man barked.
“班扬！”乌鸦歪头嘎嘎怪叫，蛋白从嘴角流下。“班扬！班扬！”
Jon chewed his lip. The raven flapped its wings at him. “War, war, war, war,” it sang.
“不。”琼恩说。除了他还有其他人，太多人。
“It’s not,” Mormont told him. “Gods save us, boy, you’re not blind and you’re not stupid. When dead men come hunting in the night, do you think it matters who sits the Iron Throne?”
“你觉得你兄弟的战争比我们这场战争更重要？”老人喝道。
“No.” Jon had not thought of it that way.
琼恩噘起嘴唇。乌鸦朝他拍拍翅膀，“战争！战争！战争！战争！”它唱道。
“Your lord father sent you to us, Jon. Why, who can say?”
“我看不然。”莫尔蒙告诉他，“诸神保佑，孩子，你眼睛没瞎，人也不笨。等哪天死人在黑夜里大举入侵，你觉得谁坐在铁王座上还有差别么？”
“Why? Why? Why?” the raven called.
“没有。”琼恩没想到这层。
“All I know is that the blood of the First Men flows in the veins of the Starks. The First Men built the Wall, and it’s said they remember things otherwise forgotten. And that beast of yours … he led us to the wights, warned you of the dead man on the steps. Ser Jaremy would doubtless call that happenstance, yet Ser Jaremy is dead and I’m not.” Lord Mormont stabbed a chunk of ham with the point of his dagger. “I think you were meant to be here, and I want you and that wolf of yours with us when we go beyond the Wall.”
“琼恩，你父亲大人把你送来这里，你可知为什么？”
His words sent a chill of excitement down Jon’s back. “Beyond the Wall?”
“为什么？为什么？为什么？”乌鸦又叫道。
“You heard me. I mean to find Ben Stark, alive or dead.” He chewed and swallowed. “I will not sit here meekly and wait for the snows and the ice winds. We must know what is happening. This time the Night’s Watch will ride in force, against the King-beyond-the-Wall, the Others, and anything else that may be out there. I mean to command them myself.” He pointed his dagger at Jon’s chest. “By custom, the Lord Commander’s steward is his squire as well … but I do not care to wake every dawn wondering if you’ve run off again. So I will have an answer from you, Lord Snow, and I will have it now. Are you a brother of the Night’s Watch … or only a bastard boy who wants to play at war?”
“我知道你们史塔克家人体内依旧流淌着先民的血液，而长城正是先民所建筑，据说他们还记得早已被人遗忘的事情。至于你那头小狼……引领我们找到尸鬼的是他，警告你楼上有死人的也是他。杰瑞米爵士多半会说一切纯属巧合，但他死了，我还好端端地活着。”莫尔蒙司令用匕首刺起一块火腿。“我认为你是命中注定要来这里的。等我们越墙北进时，我希望你和你那头狼与我们同在。”
Jon Snow straightened himself and took a long deep breath. Forgive me, Father. Robb, Arya, Bran … forgive me, I cannot help you. He has the truth of it. This is my place . “I am … yours, my lord. Your man. I swear it. I will not run again.”
他的这番话使琼恩的背脊为之一颤。“越墙北进？”
The Old Bear snorted. “Good. Now go put on your sword.”
“不错。我打算把班·史塔克找回来，不论是死是活。”他嚼了几口，吞下火腿。“我不会在这里坐等风雪来临，我们一定要知道究竟发生了什么。这次守夜人军团将大举出动，与塞外之王、异鬼，以及其他什么的东西作战。我将亲自领军。”他拿匕首指着琼恩的胸膛。“依惯例，总司令的事务官就是他的侍从……但我可不想每天早上醒来，都还要担心你是不是又逃了。所以呢，雪诺大人，你现在就给我个答案：你究竟是守夜人的弟兄……还是个只爱玩骑马打仗的私生小毛头？”
*CATELYN
琼恩·雪诺站直身子，深吸一口气。父亲、罗柏、艾莉亚、布兰……请你们原谅我，原谅我不能帮助你们。他说得没错，我属于这里。“我……随时听候您差遣，大人。我郑重发誓，绝不再逃跑了。”
I t seemed a thousand years ago that Catelyn Stark had carried her infant son out of Riverrun, crossing the Tumblestone in a small boat to begin their journey north to Winterfell. And it was across the Tumblestone that they came home now, though the boy wore plate and mail in place of swaddling clothes.
熊老哼了一声。“那敢情好。还不快把剑佩上？”
Robb sat in the bow with Grey Wind, his hand resting on his direwolf’s head as the rowers pulled at their oars. Theon Greyjoy was with him. Her uncle Brynden would come behind in the second boat, with the Greatjon and Lord Karstark.
第七十二章 凯特琳
Catelyn took a place toward the stern. They shot down the Tumblestone, letting the strong current push them past the looming Wheel Tower. The splash and rumble of the great waterwheel within was a sound from her girlhood that brought a sad smile to Catelyn’s face. From the sandstone walls of the castle, soldiers and servants shouted down her name, and Robb’s, and “Winterfell!” From every rampart waved the banner of House Tully: a leaping trout, silver, against a rippling blue-and-red field. It was a stirring sight, yet it did not lift her heart. She wondered if indeed her heart would ever lift again. Oh, Ned …
多年以前，凯特琳怀抱襁褓里的儿子，离开奔流城，搭乘小船渡过腾石河，北上临冬城。而今想起来，仿佛是千年前的事。而今，他们同样渡过腾石河，重返家园，然而当初那个婴儿，已经长成了披甲戴剑的英挺战士。
Below the Wheel Tower, they made a wide turn and knifed through the churning water. The men put their backs into it. The wide arch of the Water Gate came into view, and she heard the creak of heavy chains as the great iron portcullis was winched upward. It rose slowly as they approached, and Catelyn saw that the lower half of it was red with rust. The bottom foot dripped brown mud on them as they passed underneath, the barbed spikes mere inches above their heads. Catelyn gazed up at the bars and wondered how deep the rust went and how well the portcullis would stand up to a ram and whether it ought to be replaced. Thoughts like that were seldom far from her mind these days.
划桨起起落落，罗柏和灰风坐在船首，他把手放在冰原狼的头上，席恩·葛雷乔伊陪伴着他。布林登叔叔坐在后面的第二艘船上，与大琼恩和卡史塔克伯爵一道。
They passed beneath the arch and under the walls, moving from sunlight to shadow and back into sunlight. Boats large and small were tied up all around them, secured to iron rings set in the stone. Her father’s guards waited on the water stair with her brother. Ser Edmure Tully was a stocky young man with a shaggy head of auburn hair and a fiery beard. His breastplate was scratched and dented from battle, his blue-and-red cloak stained by blood and smoke. At his side stood the Lord Tytos Blackwood, a hard pike of a man with close-cropped salt-and-pepper whiskers and a hook nose. His bright yellow armor was inlaid with jet in elaborate vine-and-leaf patterns, and a cloak sewn from raven feathers draped his thin shoulders. It had been Lord Tytos who led the sortie that plucked her brother from the Lannister camp.
凯特琳坐在船尾，他们乘船顺流而下，任腾石河强劲的水流载着他们经过高大的水车塔。塔内巨大水车辘辘轮转，水声哗啦，儿时种种回忆牵起凯特琳嘴角一抹哀伤的微笑。城中军民排列在砂岩城墙上，高喊着他们母子的名字，高喊着“临冬城万岁！”每一座壁垒上都飘扬着徒利家族的旗帜：一尾腾跃的银色鳟鱼，衬着波动的红蓝底色。这是一幅令人振奋的景象，然而凯特琳的心却高兴不起来，她怀疑自己的心这辈子还能不能再感受喜悦。噢，奈德……
“Bring them in,” Ser Edmure commanded. Three men scrambled down the stairs knee-deep in the water and pulled the boat close with long hooks. When Grey Wind bounded out, one of them dropped his pole and lurched back, stumbling and sitting down abruptly in the river. The others laughed, and the man got a sheepish look on his face. Theon Greyjoy vaulted over the side of the boat and lifted Catelyn by the waist, setting her on a dry step above him as water lapped around his boots.
他们在水车塔下转了个大弯，直直地穿越汹涌河水，船夫使劲划桨，水门的巨大拱形映入眼帘，她听见绞链的卷动，巨大的铁闸门缓缓升起。当他们逐渐接近，凯特琳发现闸门下半部几乎全是红色铁锈，它们长年浸在水中，“水门”正是因此而得名。穿过闸门时，褐色烂泥不住滴下，门底尖刺距离头顶仅有几寸。凯特琳抬头看着铁栅，不禁纳闷其锈蚀的程度有多严重，若是遇上撞锤，这道闸门又究竟能撑多久，到底该不该换新的？这些日子以来，她脑中所想尽是这类事情。
Edmure came down the steps to embrace her. “Sweet sister,” he murmured hoarsely. He had deep blue eyes and a mouth made for smiles, but he was not smiling now. He looked worn and tired, battered by battle and haggard from strain. His neck was bandaged where he had taken a wound. Catelyn hugged him fiercely.
他们穿过拱门和城墙，从阳光下走进阴影中，接着又回到日光照耀下。四周停泊着大小船只，均稳固地系在石中铁环上。弟弟正带着父亲的卫士们在临水阶梯上等候他们。艾德慕·徒利爵士是个体格壮硕的年轻人，一蓬枣红头发，一把火红胡须，胸甲上尽是战争遗留的刮痕和凹陷，红蓝披风沾染了血渍与烟尘。站在他身边的是泰陀斯·布莱伍德伯爵，身躯硬挺，留了短短的灰胡子，生了个鹰钩鼻，亮黄色的盔甲上用黑玉镶成繁复的藤蔓图案，削瘦的肩膀上垂着鸦羽披风。率兵出城突击，将弟弟从兰尼斯特军营地里救出来的人，正是泰陀斯伯爵。
“Your grief is mine, Cat,” he said when they broke apart. “When we heard about Lord Eddard … the Lannisters will pay, I swear it, you will have your vengeance.”
“带他们进来。”艾德慕爵士下令。三个人步下阶梯，走到及膝深的水里，用长钩把小艇拉过去。灰风一跃而出，却将对方一人吓得慌忙后退，步履踉跄，跌坐水中，众人哈哈大笑，那人则露出难为情的表情。席恩·葛雷乔伊跳到船边，将凯特琳拦腰抱到干燥的石阶上，任凭流水拍打他的靴子。
“Will that bring Ned back to me?” she said sharply. The wound was still too fresh for softer words. She could not think about Ned now. She would not. It would not do. She had to be strong. “All that will keep. I must see Father.”
艾德慕走下阶梯拥抱她。“亲爱的姐姐。”他哑着嗓子说。他生了一对深邃的蓝眼睛，那双唇天生便该用来微笑，只是现在他却笑不出来。他的模样筋疲力竭，因为一连串的战争、压力而显得憔悴不堪，脖子上受伤的地方还绑了绷带。凯特琳紧紧地搂住他。
“He awaits you in his solar,” Edmure said.
“凯特，我和你一样难过。”他们分开时，他这么说，“当我们听说艾德大人出事的时候……兰尼斯特家会付出代价的，我对天发誓，一定为你复仇雪恨。”
“Lord Hoster is bedridden, my lady,” her father’s steward explained. When had that good man grown so old and grey? “He instructed me to bring you to him at once.”
“那能让奈德活过来吗？”她语气尖锐地说。伤口还太新，听不得安慰的话语。现在她无法去想与奈德有关的事，也不愿去想。这样是不行的，她必须坚强。“这些以后再说，我要去见父亲。”
“I’ll take her.” Edmure escorted her up the water stair and across the lower bailey, where Petyr Baelish and Brandon Stark had once crossed swords for her favor. The massive sandstone walls of the keep loomed above them. As they pushed through a door between two guardsmen in fish-crest helms, she asked, “How bad is he?” dreading the answer even as she said the words.
“他正在书房里等你。”艾德慕道。
Edmure’s look was somber. “He will not be with us long, the maesters say. The pain is … constant, and grievous.”
“夫人，霍斯特大人卧病在床。”父亲的总管解释。这好人何时变得如此灰白苍老？“他吩咐我立刻带您去见他。”
A blind rage filled her, a rage at all the world; at her brother Edmure and her sister Lysa, at the Lannisters, at the maesters, at Ned and her father and the monstrous gods who would take them both away from her. “You should have told me,” she said. “You should have sent word as soon as you knew.”
“让我带她去。”艾德慕陪着她步上临水阶梯，穿越下层庭院，培提尔和布兰登·史塔克就在那里为她拼斗过。巍峨的砂岩城墙高耸于头顶，他推开由一道两名头戴鱼纹盔的卫士把守的门，她借机询问：“他的情形有多坏？”她一边说，心里一边害怕即将听到的答案。
“He forbade it. He did not want his enemies to know that he was dying. With the realm so troubled, he feared that if the Lannisters suspected how frail he was …”
艾德慕神情严肃。“学士说他在人世的时间不长了。病痛时常发作……而且相当厉害。”
“… they might attack?” Catelyn finished, hard. It was your doing, yours , a voice whispered inside her. If you had not taken it upon yourself to seize the dwarf …
一股无名怒火陡然充斥了她的内心，她痛恨这整个世界，痛恨弟弟艾德慕和妹妹莱沙，痛恨兰尼斯特家族，痛恨学士，痛恨奈德和父亲，尤其痛恨将他俩自她身边夺走的狰狞诸神。“你应该早点告诉我，”她说，“你知道情形就应该跟我说。”
They climbed the spiral stair in silence.
“是他不准，他不想让敌人知道自己将不久人世。眼下王国如此动乱，若是兰尼斯特家知道他这么虚弱，他怕他们会……”
The keep was three-sided, like Riverrun itself, and Lord Hoster’s solar was triangular as well, with a stone balcony that jutted out to the east like the prow of some great sandstone ship. From there the lord of the castle could look down on his walls and battlements, and beyond, to where the waters met. They had moved her father’s bed out onto the balcony. “He likes to sit in the sun and watch the rivers,” Edmure explained. “Father, see who I’ve brought. Cat has come to see you …”
“……出兵进攻？”凯特琳艰难地替他说完。一切都是你的错，你的错啊，她心中有个声音在说，假如你没有头脑发热，逮捕那侏儒……
Hoster Tully had always been a big man; tall and broad in his youth, portly as he grew older. Now he seemed shrunken, the muscle and meat melted off his bones. Even his face sagged. The last time Catelyn had seen him, his hair and beard had been brown, well streaked with grey. Now they had gone white as snow.
他们沉默地登上螺旋梯。
His eyes opened to the sound of Edmure’s voice. “Little cat,” he murmured in a voice thin and wispy and wracked by pain. “My little cat.” A tremulous smile touched his face as his hand groped for hers. “I watched for you …”
主堡和奔流城本身一样是三边造型，霍斯特公爵的书房也是三角形，东边有一突出的石制阳台，像是一艘巨大砂岩舰只的船首。从那里，公爵大人可将自己的城墙、堡垒和对面河流交界处尽收眼底。父亲的床已被移到阳台上。“他喜欢晒太阳，观看河上风景。”艾德慕解释，“父亲，看看我带谁来了？凯特来看您了……”
“I shall leave you to talk,” her brother said, kissing their lord father gently on the brow before he withdrew.
霍斯特·徒利一向体形硕大：年轻时高大魁梧，步入老年后则显得有些臃肿。然而如今的他看起来却似乎有点萎缩，全身肌肉都融进了骨头，脸庞是那么干瘪。凯特琳上次见他时，他的头发和胡子还是棕褐里带了点灰，如今却整个变成了雪白。
Catelyn knelt and took her father’s hand in hers. It was a big hand, but fleshless now, the bones moving loosely under the skin, all the strength gone from it. “You should have told me,” she said. “A rider, a raven …”
听到艾德慕的声音，他睁开眼睛。“小凯特，”声音细小，充满痛苦，“我的小凯特。”他脸上露出一抹颤巍巍的微笑，他摸索着要握她的手。“我在等你哪……”
“Riders are taken, questioned,” he answered. “Ravens are brought down …” A spasm of pain took him, and his fingers clutched hers hard. “The crabs are in my belly … pinching, always pinching. Day and night. They have fierce claws, the crabs. Maester Vyman makes me dreamwine, milk of the poppy … I sleep a lot … but I wanted to be awake to see you, when you came. I was afraid … when the Lannisters took your brother, the camps all around us … I was afraid I would go, before I could see you again … I was afraid …”
“你们谈吧。”说着弟弟轻轻吻了父亲大人的额头，然后转身离开。
“I’m here, Father,” she said. “With Robb, my son. He’ll want to see you too.”
凯特琳跪下来，握住父亲的手。那手从前虽大，如今却显得枯槁，皮肤松垮垮地覆盖着骨头，早已丧失了所有的力量。“您早该跟我说，”她说，“派人送信，或是叫鸟儿……”
“Your boy,” he whispered. “He had my eyes, I remember …”
“使者会被抓，被严刑逼供，”他回答，“渡鸦会被射下来……”一阵剧痛突然袭来，他的指头紧紧抓住她的手。“螃蟹在我肚子里……夹啊夹，夹个不停，日夜不休地夹。他们的钳子好生锐利啊，这些螃蟹。韦曼师傅调了梦酒给我喝，还有罂粟奶……所以我睡得很多……但你来的时候，我一定要醒着，好好看看你。兰尼斯特家抓走你弟弟那会儿……我好害怕……到处是他们的营地……我好怕我就这么走了，没机会再见你一面……我好怕……”
“He did, and does. And we’ve brought you Jaime Lannister, in irons. Riverrun is free again, Father.”
“父亲，我这不就来了么？”她说，“我和罗柏一道来的，他是您的外孙呢，他很想见您。”
Lord Hoster smiled. “I saw. Last night, when it began, I told them … had to see. They carried me to the gatehouse … watched from the battlements. Ah, that was beautiful … the torches came in a wave, I could hear the cries floating across the river … sweet cries … when that siege tower went up, gods … would have died then, and glad, if only I could have seen you children first. Was it your boy who did it? Was it your Robb?”
“你的孩子，”他小声说，“他继承了我的眼睛，我记得的……”
“Yes,” Catelyn said, fiercely proud. “It was Robb … and Brynden. Your brother is here as well, my lord.”
“是的，如今依然。我们还为您带来了詹姆·兰尼斯特，他是我们的阶下囚了。父亲，奔流城之围已经化解。”
“Him.” Her father’s voice was a faint whisper. “The Blackfish … came back? From the Vale?”
霍斯特公爵微笑：“我看到了，昨晚开战的时候，我跟他们说……我非看不可，于是他们把我抬上城门楼……我从城垛上看去。啊，真是太美了……火把像潮水一般涌过来，我听见河对岸的惨叫……多美妙的惨叫……攻城塔整个烧起来了，诸神保佑……我要是那时候就死了也没关系，还会很高兴地走，只是我想先看看你的孩子。昨晚是你儿子干的么？就你家那个罗柏？”
“Yes.”
“是，”凯特琳的口气坚定而骄傲。“正是罗柏……还有布林登。父亲大人，叔叔他也回来了。”
“And Lysa?” A cool wind moved through his thin white hair. “Gods be good, your sister … did she come as well?”
“他，”父亲的声音成了微弱的呓语，“黑鱼……也回来了？从艾林谷回来了？”
He sounded so full of hope and yearning that it was hard to tell the truth. “No. I’m sorry …”
“是的。”
“Oh.” His face fell, and some light went out of his eyes. “I’d hoped … I would have liked to see her, before …”
“莱沙呢？”一阵冷风吹过他稀疏的白发。“诸神保佑，你妹妹……她也回来了吗？”
“She’s with her son, in the Eyrie.”
他的话中充满希望和渴盼，要说出真相实在困难。“没有，我很抱歉……”
Lord Hoster gave a weary nod. “Lord Robert now, poor Arryn’s gone … I remember … why did she not come with you?”
“噢，”他脸色一垮，眼里少了些许光芒。“我本希望……我本想再看看她，然后才……”
“She is frightened, my lord. In the Eyrie she feels safe.” She kissed his wrinkled brow. “Robb will be waiting. Will you see him? And Brynden?”
“她在鹰巢城守着她儿子。”
“Your son,” he whispered. “Yes. Cat’s child … he had my eyes, I remember. When he was born. Bring him … yes.”
霍斯特公爵虚弱地点点头。“可怜的艾林一死，眼下他成了劳勃公爵……我明白……但她怎么不跟你一道来？”
“And your brother?”
“父亲大人，她很害怕，只是在鹰巢城里才有安全感。”她吻了吻他满是皱纹的眉头。“罗柏正在外面等候，您要不要先看看他？还有布林登？”
Her father glanced out over the rivers. “Blackfish,” he said. “Has he wed yet? Taken some … girl to wife?”
“你儿子，”他小声说，“对，小凯特的孩子……他有我的眼睛，我记得的，他刚出生时……好……带他进来吧。”
Even on his deathbed , Catelyn thought sadly. “He has not wed. You know that, Father. Nor will he ever.”
“那叔叔呢？”
“I told him … commanded him. Marry! I was his lord. He knows. My right, to make his match. A good match. A Redwyne. Old House. Sweet girl, pretty … freckles … Bethany, yes. Poor child. Still waiting. Yes. Still …”
父亲望了河流一眼。“黑鱼，”他说，“他结婚了么？娶……娶妻了没？”
“Bethany Redwyne wed Lord Rowan years ago,” Catelyn reminded him. “She has three children by him.”
到了临终还是念念不忘，凯特琳哀伤地想。“他没结婚。父亲，你知道的，他这辈子都不会结婚了。”
“Even so,” Lord Hoster muttered. “Even so. Spit on the girl. The Redwynes. Spit on me . His lord, his brother … that Blackfish. I had other offers. Lord Bracken’s girl. Walder Frey … any of three, he said … Has he wed? Anyone? Anyone?”
“我跟他说了……我命令他结婚！我是他的领主，他知道我有权替他安排婚事。雷德温家族血统古老，门当户对，那女孩人既漂亮，又乖巧……只是有一点雀斑……蓓珊妮，对，就是这名字。可怜的孩子，一直等到现在，是啊，可是……”
“No one,” Catelyn said, “yet he has come many leagues to see you, fighting his way back to Riverrun. I would not be here now, if Ser Brynden had not helped us.”
“蓓珊妮·雷德温多年以前就嫁给了罗宛伯爵，”凯特琳提醒他，“都已经是三个孩子的母亲了。”
“He was ever a warrior,” her father husked. “That he could do. Knight of the Gate, yes.” He leaned back and closed his eyes, inutterably weary. “Send him. Later. I’ll sleep now. Too sick to fight. Send him up later, the Blackfish …”
“是么，”霍斯特公爵喃喃自语，“是这样的么，那女孩该死，雷德温家该死，我最该死。我是他的领主，他的哥哥……这条黑鱼，不然我也有其他对象啊，布雷肯大人的女儿，瓦德·佛雷……三个随他挑，这是那家伙自己说的……他到底成婚了没？娶妻了没？娶了没？”
Catelyn kissed him gently, smoothed his hair, and left him there in the shade of his keep, with his rivers flowing beneath. He was asleep before she left the solar.
“他谁也没娶，”凯特琳说，“但他却不远千里，一路奋战，回到奔流城来看您。如果没有布林登爵士的协助，我也不会在这里。”
When she returned to the lower bailey, Ser Brynden Tully stood on the water stairs with wet boots, talking with the captain of Riverrun’s guards. He came to her at once. “Is he—?”
“他向来是块打仗的料，”他喉咙干涩，“他的确有这方面的本领，血门骑士，对不对？”他向后躺去，闭上眼睛，似乎浑身虚脱。“等会儿再叫他来，现在我要睡一会儿，太累了，没力气吵架，晚点，再叫他进来，这条黑鱼……”
“Dying,” she said. “As we feared.”
凯特琳轻轻吻了他，整整他的头发，把他留在自己城堡的阴影里，与下方奔涌流淌的河流为伴。她还未离开书房，他便已入睡。
Her uncle’s craggy face showed his pain plain. He ran his fingers through his thick grey hair. “Will he see me?”
当她回到下层庭院，只见布林登·徒利爵士正站在临水阶梯上，鞋子淌水，一边和奔流城的侍卫队长交谈。一见她面，他立刻问道：“他是不是——？”
She nodded. “He says he is too sick to fight.”
“他时候不多了，”她说，“和我们料想的一样。”
Brynden Blackfish chuckled. “I am too old a soldier to believe that. Hoster will be chiding me about the Redwyne girl even as we light his funeral pyre, damn his bones.”
叔叔那张粗犷的脸上明显流露出痛苦之色，他伸手拨拨蓬厚的灰发。“他愿意见我吗？”
Catelyn smiled, knowing it was true. “I do not see Robb.”
她点点头，“是的，但他说自己现在太累，没力气吵架。”
“He went with Greyjoy to the hall, I believe.”
黑鱼布林登忍俊不禁。“我相信才有鬼。就算他已经上了火葬堆，我们一边给他点火，霍斯特这家伙还是会念个没完，说我没娶那个雷德温家的女孩，这老浑球。”
Theon Greyjoy was seated on a bench in Riverrun’s Great Hall, enjoying a horn of ale and regaling her father’s garrison with an account of the slaughter in the Whispering Wood. “Some tried to flee, but we’d pinched the valley shut at both ends, and we rode out of the darkness with sword and lance. The Lannisters must have thought the Others themselves were on them when that wolf of Robb’s got in among them. I saw him tear one man’s arm from his shoulder, and their horses went mad at the scent of him. I couldn’t tell you how many men were thrown—”
凯特琳露出微笑，心照不宣。“我没看到罗柏。”
“Theon,” she interrupted, “where might I find my son?”
“他应该同葛雷乔伊一起到大厅去了。”
“Lord Robb went to visit the godswood, my lady.”
席恩·葛雷乔伊坐在奔流城大厅的板凳上，一手拿着麦酒角杯，一边跟父亲的手下叙述呓语森林大捷的经过。“……那群人想逃，可我们把河谷两头堵得死死的，然后拿刀拿枪从黑暗里冲出来，罗柏那头狼杀进去时，兰尼斯特家的人八成以为是异鬼来了。我亲眼看见它把一个人的胳膊活生生地扯下来，周围的马闻到它的气味就发了狂，落马的人不可胜数……”
It was what Ned would have done. He is his father’s son as much as mine, I must remember. Oh, gods, Ned …
“席恩，”她打断他，“我儿子到哪里去了？”
She found Robb beneath the green canopy of leaves, surrounded by tall redwoods and great old elms, kneeling before the heart tree, a slender weirwood with a face more sad than fierce. His longsword was before him, the point thrust in the earth, his gloved hands clasped around the hilt. Around him others knelt: Greatjon Umber, Rickard Karstark, Maege Mormont, Galbart Glover, and more. Even Tytos Blackwood was among them, the great raven cloak fanned out behind him. These are the ones who keep the old gods , she realized. She asked herself what gods she kept these days, and could not find an answer.
“夫人，罗柏大人去了神木林。”
It would not do to disturb them at their prayers. The gods must have their due … even cruel gods who would take Ned from her, and her lord father as well. So Catelyn waited. The river wind moved through the high branches, and she could see the Wheel Tower to her right, ivy crawling up its side. As she stood there, all the memories came flooding back to her. Her father had taught her to ride amongst these trees, and that was the elm that Edmure had fallen from when he broke his arm, and over there, beneath that bower, she and Lysa had played at kissing with Petyr.
奈德以前也每每如此。他是他父亲的儿子，正如他是我的儿子，我必须牢牢记住。噢，诸神慈悲，奈德……
She had not thought of that in years. How young they all had been—she no older than Sansa, Lysa younger than Arya, and Petyr younger still, yet eager. The girls had traded him between them, serious and giggling by turns. It came back to her so vividly she could almost feel his sweaty fingers on her shoulders and taste the mint on his breath. There was always mint growing in the godswood, and Petyr had liked to chew it. He had been such a bold little boy, always in trouble. “He tried to put his tongue in my mouth,” Catelyn had confessed to her sister afterward, when they were alone. “He did with me too,” Lysa had whispered, shy and breathless. “I liked it.”
她在绿叶编织的树蓬下找到罗柏，四周满是大红杉和老榆树。他跪在心树之前，那是一棵纤瘦的鱼梁木，刻画其上的脸庞多了几许哀伤，少了几分坚毅。他的长剑插在面前，剑尖深入土中，他双手戴着手套，紧紧握住剑柄，跪在他身旁的是大琼恩·安柏、瑞卡德·卡史塔克、梅姬·莫尔蒙、盖伯特·葛洛佛等人，泰陀斯·布莱伍德亦在其中，硕大的鸦羽披风摊在身后。这些是依旧信奉古老诸神的人，她明白，但当她扪心自问：如今的自己究竟信奉哪个神？却找不到答案。
Robb got to his feet slowly and sheathed his sword, and Catelyn found herself wondering whether her son had ever kissed a girl in the godswood. Surely he must have. She had seen Jeyne Poole giving him moist-eyed glances, and some of the serving girls, even ones as old as eighteen … he had ridden in battle and killed men with a sword, surely he had been kissed. There were tears in her eyes. She wiped them away angrily.
她只觉不应打扰他们祷告，诸神行事自有其理由……即便是从她手中夺走奈德，夺走父亲大人的残酷神祗，于是凯特琳静静等候。河风吹动树梢，她看到右边远方的水车塔，上面爬满了长春藤。伫立原地，所有的回忆排山倒海般向她袭来，当年父亲正是在这片树林里教她骑马，艾德慕曾经从那棵榆树上摔下来，跌断了手臂，她和莱沙还在那片树荫下与培提尔玩亲吻游戏。
“Mother,” Robb said when he saw her standing there. “We must call a council. There are things to be decided.”
她已有多年不曾回想起这些事，记得他们当时年纪还小——她自己与现在的珊莎相若，莱莎比艾莉亚年幼，培提尔则更小，却最迫不及待。两个女孩轮流和他接吻，一会儿郑重其事，一会儿咯咯直笑，如今回想起来，历历在目。她仿佛还可以感觉到他搭着她肩膀的手，大汗淋漓，闻到他嘴里的薄荷气味。神木林里薄荷遍地，培提尔没事最爱嚼个几片。那时的他真是个胆大的小鬼，一天到晚闯祸。“他想把舌头伸进我嘴里呢。”独处时，凯特琳偷偷跟妹妹说。“他也这么对我做，”莱莎悄声道，面带羞怯，但兴奋得喘不过气。“我很喜欢。”
“Your grandfather would like to see you,” she said. “Robb, he’s very sick.”
罗柏缓缓起身，收剑入鞘，凯特琳突然想到：她的儿子曾否在神木林里吻过女孩子呢？一定有吧。她看见珍妮·普尔睁着水汪汪的眼睛望着他，城堡里好些女侍也是，其中有几个已经满了十八岁……他既然已经打过仗、杀过人，一定也吻过女孩子。她眼里充满泪水，连忙愤怒地将之抹去。
“Ser Edmure told me. I am sorry, Mother … for Lord Hoster and for you. Yet first we must meet. We’ve had word from the south. Renly Baratheon has claimed his brother’s crown.”
“母亲，”罗柏看到她站在那里，便开口道，“我们必须召开会议，很多事情需要讨论决定。”
“Renly?” she said, shocked. “I had thought, surely it would be Lord Stannis …”
“你外公想见你，”她说，“罗柏，他病得很重。”
“So did we all, my lady,” Galbart Glover said.
“艾德慕爵士把他的情况跟我说了。母亲，我很为霍斯特大人难过……也为你难过，但我们必须先开会，我们刚刚接到南方传来的消息，蓝礼·拜拉席恩已经登基称王。”
The war council convened in the Great Hall, at four long trestle tables arranged in a broken square. Lord Hoster was too weak to attend, asleep on his balcony, dreaming of the sun on the rivers of his youth. Edmure sat in the high seat of the Tullys, with Brynden Blackfish at his side, and his father’s bannermen arrayed to right and left and along the side tables. Word of the victory at Riverrun had spread to the fugitive lords of the Trident, drawing them back. Karyl Vance came in, a lord now, his father dead beneath the Golden Tooth. Ser Marq Piper was with him, and they brought a Darry, Ser Raymun’s son, a lad no older than Bran. Lord Jonos Bracken arrived from the ruins of Stone Hedge, glowering and blustering, and took a seat as far from Tytos Blackwood as the tables would permit.
“蓝礼？”她大为震惊，“应该是史坦尼斯大人……”
The northern lords sat opposite, with Catelyn and Robb facing her brother across the tables. They were fewer. The Greatjon sat at Robb’s left hand, and then Theon Greyjoy; Galbart Glover and Lady Mormont were to the right of Catelyn. Lord Rickard Karstark, gaunt and hollow-eyed in his grief, took his seat like a man in a nightmare, his long beard uncombed and unwashed. He had left two sons dead in the Whispering Wood, and there was no word of the third, his eldest, who had led the Karstark spears against Tywin Lannister on the Green Fork.
“夫人，我们也都这么想。”盖伯特·葛洛佛道。
The arguing raged on late into the night. Each lord had a right to speak, and speak they did … and shout, and curse, and reason, and cajole, and jest, and bargain, and slam tankards on the table, and threaten, and walk out, and return sullen or smiling. Catelyn sat and listened to it all.
战争会议在大厅举行，四张长折叠桌排成向上开口的方形。霍斯特公爵病情太重，无法与会，依旧浅眠于阳台上，做着他年轻时长河落日的梦。艾德慕坐上了徒利家族的高位，身旁是黑鱼布林登，他父亲的封臣则分坐于左右两侧。原本兵败逃亡的三叉戟河贵族，接获奔流城捷报后，又纷纷回来了。卡利尔·凡斯的父亲战死于金牙山城，如今他已继承了爵位。与他同来的有马柯·派柏，此外还有雷蒙·戴瑞爵士的儿子，那孩子年纪和布兰差不多。杰诺斯·布雷肯伯爵怒火冲天地从石篱城的废墟中赶来，并尽可能地跟泰陀斯·布莱伍德伯爵保持距离。
Roose Bolton had re-formed the battered remnants of their other host at the mouth of the causeway. Ser Helman Tallhart and Walder Frey still held the Twins. Lord Tywin’s army had crossed the Trident, and was making for Harrenhal. And there were two kings in the realm. Two kings, and no agreement.
凯特琳、罗柏和北境诸侯坐在高位对面，面朝她弟弟。他们人数较少。大琼恩坐在罗柏左手，之后是席恩·葛雷乔伊；盖伯特·葛洛佛和莫尔蒙伯爵夫人坐在凯特琳右侧。遭受丧子之痛的瑞卡德·卡史塔克伯爵形容憔悴，眼神空洞，宛如噩梦缠身的人，长长的胡子也不再梳洗。他的两个儿子战死于呓语森林，长子则率领卡史塔克部队在绿叉河与泰温·兰尼斯特作战，至今生死未卜。
Many of the lords bannermen wanted to march on Harrenhal at once, to meet Lord Tywin and end Lannister power for all time. Young, hot-tempered Marq Piper urged a strike west at Casterly Rock instead. Still others counseled patience. Riverrun sat athwart the Lannister supply lines, Jason Mallister pointed out; let them bide their time, denying Lord Tywin fresh levies and provisions while they strengthened their defenses and rested their weary troops. Lord Blackwood would have none of it. They should finish the work they began in the Whispering Wood. March to Harrenhal and bring Roose Bolton’s army down as well. What Blackwood urged, Bracken opposed, as ever; Lord Jonos Bracken rose to insist they ought pledge their fealty to King Renly, and move south to join their might to his.
接下来是持续的争吵，直至深夜。每位贵族都有权发言，他们也各自把握机会，卯足全力……或大吼大叫、或高声咒骂、或晓之以理、或连哄带骗、或语带玩笑、或讨价还价、或拿酒拍桌、或出言要胁，时时有人愤而离席，然后沉着脸或微笑着回来。凯特琳静静地坐着，凝神倾听。
“Renly is not the king,” Robb said. It was the first time her son had spoken. Like his father, he knew how to listen.
根据情报，卢斯·波顿已在颈泽的堤道口重整败军，赫曼·陶哈爵士和瓦德·佛雷则依旧握有孪河城。泰温公爵的部队已经回头渡过三叉戟河，正朝赫伦堡前进。目前国内有两人称王，且彼此互不相让。
“You cannot mean to hold to Joffrey, my lord,” Galbart Glover said. “He put your father to death.”
许多诸侯希望即刻进军赫伦堡，与泰温公爵决战，一举消灭兰尼斯特势力。血气方刚的年轻人马柯·派柏更力主派兵西进凯岩城。但仍有不少人建议暂缓行动。杰森·梅利斯特特别指出：眼下奔流城刚好扼住兰尼斯特军的补给线，不妨把握这个优势，阻止泰温大人获得补充兵力和物资，并借机加强自身防御，让疲累的军队得到休整。对所有谨慎的提议，布莱伍德伯爵一概听不进去，他认为应该乘着呓语森林之战的势头，早日结束战事，所以不但要立刻进军赫伦堡，还要卢斯·波顿的部队南下配合支援。依照惯例，只要是布莱伍德家族的主意，布雷肯家族一定反对到底，于是杰诺斯·布雷肯起身力促大家向蓝礼国王效忠，并南下与其大军会师。
“That makes him evil,” Robb replied. “I do not know that it makes Renly king. Joffrey is still Robert’s eldest trueborn son, so the throne is rightfully his by all the laws of the realm. Were he to die, and I mean to see that he does, he has a younger brother. Tommen is next in line after Joffrey.”
“蓝礼不是国王。”罗柏说。这是会议以来他首次开口。他知道何时该留心倾听，这点颇有乃父之风。
“Tommen is no less a Lannister,” Ser Marq Piper snapped.
“大人，您总不能向乔佛里效忠吧？”盖伯特·葛洛佛道，“令尊就死在他手里啊。”
“As you say,” said Robb, troubled. “Yet if neither one is king, still, how could it be Lord Renly? He’s Robert’s younger brother. Bran can’t be Lord of Winterfell before me, and Renly can’t be king before Lord Stannis.”
“这代表他是个恶人，”罗柏回答：“却不代表蓝礼就是国王。乔佛里是劳勃的嫡长子，依照王国律法，王位理应归他所有。若他死了——请诸位相信我打算亲眼看着他死——他也还有个弟弟。王位的继承权会传到托曼手中。”
Lady Mormont agreed. “Lord Stannis has the better claim.”
“托曼也是个不折不扣的兰尼斯特。”马柯·派柏爵士斥道。
“Renly is crowned,” said Marq Piper. “Highgarden and Storm’s End support his claim, and the Dornishmen will not be laggardly. If Winterfell and Riverrun add their strength to his, he will have five of the seven great houses behind him. Six , if the Arryns bestir themselves! Six against the Rock! My lords, within the year, we will have all their heads on pikes, the queen and the boy king, Lord Tywin, the Imp, the Kingslayer, Ser Kevan, all of them! That is what we shall win if we join with King Renly. What does Lord Stannis have against that, that we should cast it all aside?”
“没错，”罗柏有些困扰，“但即便两人皆死，也轮不到蓝礼称王。他是劳勃的二弟，好比布兰不能先于我成为临冬城公爵，蓝礼也不能先于史坦尼斯取得王位。”
“The right,” said Robb stubbornly. Catelyn thought he sounded eerily like his father as he said it.
莫尔蒙伯爵夫人表示同意：“史坦尼斯大人的确比他有资格。”
“So you mean us to declare for Stannis?” asked Edmure.
“但蓝礼已经接受了加冕，”马柯·派柏说，“高庭和风息堡都支持他，多恩领想必也不会袖手旁观。倘若临冬城和奔流城的势力与之结合，七大家族中便有五家归他指挥。若是艾林家族也肯出兵，那就是七分之六的势力！以六敌一，诸位大人，用不了一年，我们便可把太后、小鬼国王、泰温公爵、小恶魔、弑君者、凯冯爵士他们的头通通插在枪尖上！我们只需加入蓝礼国王，便可取得这样丰硕的战果，何必抛开一切去投效史坦尼斯大人呢？他能给我们什么好处？”
“I don’t know,” said Robb. “I prayed to know what to do, but the gods did not answer. The Lannisters killed my father for a traitor, and we know that was a lie, but if Joffrey is the lawful king and we fight against him, we will be traitors.”
“依照律法，他的权利先于蓝礼。”罗柏固执地说。凯特琳觉得他说话的模样像极了他父亲，竟有些害怕。
“My lord father would urge caution,” aged Ser Stevron said, with the weaselly smile of a Frey. “Wait, let these two kings play their game of thrones. When they are done fighting, we can bend our knees to the victor, or oppose him, as we choose. With Renly arming, likely Lord Tywin would welcome a truce … and the safe return of his son. Noble lords, allow me to go to him at Harrenhal and arrange good terms and ransoms …”
“那么，你的意思是要我们投效史坦尼斯大人？”艾德慕问。
A roar of outrage drowned out his voice. “Craven!” the Greatjon thundered. “Begging for a truce will make us seem weak,” declared Lady Mormont. “Ransoms be damned, we must not give up the Kingslayer,” shouted Rickard Karstark.
“我不知道。”罗柏说，“我向诸神祈求，希望他们指点接下来的方向，但他们并未回答。兰尼斯特说我父亲是叛徒，并谋害了他，我们都知道这是无耻的谎言，可是，倘若乔佛里是合法的国王，而我们又举兵反抗，那我们就真的成了叛徒了。”
“Why not a peace?” Catelyn asked.
“在目前的情势下，家父会敦促各位谨慎行事，”年长的史提夫伦爵士说，露出佛雷家黄鼠狼般的招牌微笑。“何妨静观其变，让两个国王大玩权力游戏呢？等他们打完了，我们既可以向胜利者称臣，也可以举兵反抗，一切任凭我们抉择。而目前蓝礼既已起兵，泰温大人应该会急于与我方谈和……并换取他儿子平安归去。诸位可敬的大人，就让我前往赫伦堡，与他谈判休兵的条件，并提出赎金……”
The lords looked at her, but it was Robb’s eyes she felt, his and his alone. “My lady, they murdered my lord father, your husband,” he said grimly. He unsheathed his longsword and laid it on the table before him, the bright steel on the rough wood. “This is the only peace I have for Lannisters.”
一声怒吼淹没了他的话音。“你这个懦夫！”大琼恩吼道。“乞求议和就是示弱。”莫尔蒙伯爵夫人也宣布。“去他妈的赎金，说什么我们都不能放走弑君者！”瑞卡德·卡史塔克伯爵叫道。
The Greatjon bellowed his approval, and other men added their voices, shouting and drawing swords and pounding their fists on the table. Catelyn waited until they had quieted. “My lords,” she said then, “Lord Eddard was your liege, but I shared his bed and bore his children. Do you think I love him any less than you?” Her voice almost broke with her grief, but Catelyn took a long breath and steadied herself. “Robb, if that sword could bring him back, I should never let you sheathe it until Ned stood at my side once more … but he is gone, and a hundred Whispering Woods will not change that. Ned is gone, and Daryn Hornwood, and Lord Karstark’s valiant sons, and many other good men besides, and none of them will return to us. Must we have more deaths still?”
“为什么不议和？”凯特琳问。
“You are a woman, my lady,” the Greatjon rumbled in his deep voice. “Women do not understand these things.”
诸侯们全转过头来，盯着她，但她只感觉得出罗柏注视她的眼神。“母亲，他们谋杀了我的父亲，您的丈夫。”他沉痛地说。他抽出长剑，放在面前的桌子上，精钢打造的利刃在粗糙的木头上闪着寒光。“我拿这个跟他们谈判。”
“You are the gentle sex,” said Lord Karstark, with the lines of grief fresh on his face. “A man has a need for vengeance.”
大琼恩高声附和，其他人也表示同意，他们或随之呐喊，或握拳拍桌，纷纷抽出佩剑。凯特琳静待他们平息。“诸位大人，”她接着说，“艾德大人是各位的主子和同僚，但我与他同床共枕，为他生儿育女，难道我对他的爱不如各位么？”她哀恸得险些没了声音，但她深吸一口气，用力安抚情绪。“罗柏，假如用剑可以使他起死回生，那么直到奈德再次站在我身边为止，我都绝不允许你收剑入鞘……然而逝者已矣，纵然有一百次呓语森林大捷也改变不了这事实。奈德走了，戴林恩·霍伍德走了，卡史塔克大人两个英勇的儿子，以及除此之外许许多多的人都走了，他们都不会再回来。难道我们还要赔上更多人命？”
“Give me Cersei Lannister, Lord Karstark, and you would see how gentle a woman can be,” Catelyn replied. “Perhaps I do not understand tactics and strategy … but I understand futility. We went to war when Lannister armies were ravaging the riverlands, and Ned was a prisoner, falsely accused of treason. We fought to defend ourselves, and to win my lord’s freedom.
“夫人，您毕竟是女人家，”大琼恩用那浑厚低沉的声音说：“女人家不懂这种事。”
“Well, the one is done, and the other forever beyond our reach. I will mourn for Ned until the end of my days, but I must think of the living. I want my daughters back, and the queen holds them still. If I must trade our four Lannisters for their two Starks, I will call that a bargain and thank the gods. I want you safe, Robb, ruling at Winterfell from your father’s seat. I want you to live your life, to kiss a girl and wed a woman and father a son. I want to write an end to this. I want to go home, my lords, and weep for my husband.”
“女人家心肠软，”卡史塔克伯爵道，脸上刻满悲伤的痕迹。“男人是需要复仇的。”
The hall was very quiet when Catelyn finished speaking.
“卡史塔克大人，把瑟曦·兰尼斯特交到我手上，我就让您见识一下女人家的心肠有多软。”凯特琳回答：“我或许不懂战术谋略……但我知道什么是徒劳无功。我们出兵打仗，是为了阻止兰尼斯特军在河间地烧杀掳掠，是为了拯救遭人诬陷，身陷囹圄的奈德。我们的目的在于保护领土，并使我夫君重获自由。”
“Peace,” said her uncle Brynden. “Peace is sweet, my lady … but on what terms? It is no good hammering your sword into a plowshare if you must forge it again on the morrow.”
“目前我们已经达成一个目的，而另一个则永远不可能达成。虽然直到我死的那一天，我都会为奈德哀悼，然而我必须首先为生者考虑。我希望我的两个女儿能平安归来，她们如今还在太后手里。倘若我必须拿四个兰尼斯特家人去交换两个史塔克家人，我认为这样非常划算，并为此感谢天上诸神。罗柏，我希望你平平安安，接替你父亲的爵位，统治临冬城。我希望能见你幸福快乐地生活，亲吻女孩的双唇，娶妻生子。我希望能结束这一切。诸位大人，我渴望重返家园，并为亡夫哭泣终老。”
“What did Torrhen and my Eddard die for, if I am to return to Karhold with nothing but their bones?” asked Rickard Karstark.
凯特琳语毕，大厅一片寂然。
“Aye,” said Lord Bracken. “Gregor Clegane laid waste to my fields, slaughtered my smallfolk, and left Stone Hedge a smoking ruin. Am I now to bend the knee to the ones who sent him? What have we fought for, if we are to put all back as it was before?”
“议和，”布林登叔叔说，“夫人，能议和自然好……但在什么条件之下呢？如果今日议和，马放南山，明日便得拿起武器，重返战场，这是没有意义的。”
Lord Blackwood agreed, to Catelyn’s surprise and dismay. “And if we do make peace with King Joffrey, are we not then traitors to King Renly? What if the stag should prevail against the lion, where would that leave us?”
“假如我只能带着儿子的尸骨返回卡霍城，那么我的托伦和艾德死了又有何价值？”瑞卡德·卡史塔克质问。
“Whatever you may decide for yourselves, I shall never call a Lannister my king,” declared Marq Piper.
“没错，”布雷肯伯爵道，“格雷果·克里冈烧光我的田地，屠杀我的子民，石篱城而今只剩一片焦黑废墟。难道我还得向派他来的人卑躬屈膝？假如能这么轻易地忘记一切，何必辛辛苦苦打仗呢？”
“Nor I!” yelled the little Darry boy. “I never will!”
令凯特琳意外和沮丧的是，布莱伍德大人竟也同意他的说法：“就算我们和乔佛里国王达成和议，岂不又成了蓝礼国王眼中的叛徒？若是狮鹿相争鹿得胜，我们又怎么办？”
Again the shouting began. Catelyn sat despairing. She had come so close, she thought. They had almost listened, almost … but the moment was gone. There would be no peace, no chance to heal, no safety. She looked at her son, watched him as he listened to the lords debate, frowning, troubled, yet wedded to his war. He had pledged himself to marry a daughter of Walder Frey, but she saw his true bride plain before her now: the sword he had laid on the table.
“无论你们作何决定，反正我绝不承认兰尼斯特家的人是国王。”马柯·派柏爵士宣布。
Catelyn was thinking of her girls, wondering if she would ever see them again, when the Greatjon lurched to his feet.
“我也不会！”戴瑞家的小男孩叫道，“我绝不会！”
“MY LORDS!” he shouted, his voice booming off the rafters. “Here is what I say to these two kings!” He spat. “Renly Baratheon is nothing to me, nor Stannis neither. Why should they rule over me and mine, from some flowery seat in Highgarden or Dorne? What do they know of the Wall or the wolfswood or the barrows of the First Men? Even their gods are wrong. The Others take the Lannisters too, I’ve had a bellyful of them.” He reached back over his shoulder and drew his immense two-handed greatsword. “Why shouldn’t we rule ourselves again? It was the dragons we married, and the dragons are all dead!” He pointed at Robb with the blade. “There sits the only king I mean to bow my knee to, m’lords,” he thundered. “The King in the North!”
众人再度互相大呼小叫。凯特琳绝望地坐着，差一点就说服他们了，她心想，他们几乎就要听从她了，就差那么一点……然而时机稍纵即逝，议和的希望已然破灭，再也没有机会疗伤止痛，保护儿女们安全了。她看看儿子，看着他聆听诸侯争论。他皱眉、困扰，已经全然与这场战争密不可分。他承诺将娶瓦德·佛雷的女儿为妻，但她看得出他真正的新娘是眼前桌上的那把剑。
And he knelt, and laid his sword at her son’s feet.
凯特琳想着两个女儿，不知今生是否还有机会见面，这时大琼恩一跃而起。
“I’ll have peace on those terms,” Lord Karstark said. “They can keep their red castle and their iron chair as well.” He eased his longsword from its scabbard. “The King in the North!” he said, kneeling beside the Greatjon.
“诸位大人！”他高声大喝，声音在屋宇间回荡。“听我说说我对这两个国王的看法！”他啐了一口。“蓝礼·拜拉席恩对我来说狗屁不是，史坦尼斯也一样，凭什么让坐在满地开花的高庭或多恩的人来统治我们？他们哪里懂得绝境长城、狼林和先民荒冢？就连他们信奉的神也不是真神。至于兰尼斯特，叫异鬼把他们抓去吧，老子受够了。”他伸手过肩，抽出那把骇人的双手巨剑。“咱们为什么不能像以前一样自己管自己？咱们娶的是真龙的女儿，眼下真龙已经死光啦！”他剑指罗柏。“诸位大人，要我下跪没问题，但我只跟这一位国王下跪。”他话声如雷，“北境之王万岁！”
Maege Mormont stood. “The King of Winter!” she declared, and laid her spiked mace beside the swords. And the river lords were rising too, Blackwood and Bracken and Mallister, houses who had never been ruled from Winterfell, yet Catelyn watched them rise and draw their blades, bending their knees and shouting the old words that had not been heard in the realm for more than three hundred years, since Aegon the Dragon had come to make the Seven Kingdoms one … yet now were heard again, ringing from the timbers of her father’s hall:
然后他跪下来，将佩剑放在她儿子脚边。
“The King in the North!”
“这样的话，我也同意停战。”卡史塔克伯爵道，“就让他们继续保有红城堡和铁椅子吧。”他抽出长剑。“北境之王万岁！”说罢他跪在大琼恩身边。
“The King in the North!”
梅姬·莫尔蒙站起来。“冬境之王万岁！”她高声宣布，接着将她的带刺钉头锤放在两把剑旁边。这时河间贵族们也纷纷起身，虽然布莱伍德、布雷肯和梅利斯特等家族从未被临冬城统辖，凯特琳却见他们一一起立，拔出佩剑，屈膝下跪，口中高喊着三百年来无人听过的古老名讳。自从龙王伊耿一统六国，这个称号首度堂皇重现，响彻于她父亲的木造殿堂：
“THE KING IN THE NORTH!”
“北境之王万岁！”
*DAENERYS
“北境之王万岁！”
T he land was red and dead and parched, and good wood was hard to come by. Her foragers returned with gnarled cottonwoods, purple brush, sheaves of brown grass. They took the two straightest trees, hacked the limbs and branches from them, skinned off their bark, and split them, laying the logs in a square. Its center they filled with straw, brush, bark shavings, and bundles of dry grass. Rakharo chose a stallion from the small herd that remained to them; he was not the equal of Khal Drogo’s red, but few horses were. In the center of the square, Aggo fed him a withered apple and dropped him in an instant with an axe blow between the eyes.
“北境之王万岁！”
Bound hand and foot, Mirri Maz Duur watched from the dust with disquiet in her black eyes. “It is not enough to kill a horse,” she told Dany. “By itself, the blood is nothing. You do not have the words to make a spell, nor the wisdom to find them. Do you think bloodmagic is a game for children? You call me maegi as if it were a curse, but all it means is wise . You are a child, with a child’s ignorance. Whatever you mean to do, it will not work. Loose me from these bonds and I will help you.”
第七十三章 丹妮莉丝
“I am tired of the maegi’s braying,” Dany told Jhogo. He took his whip to her, and after that the godswife kept silent.
此地遍野红沙，四下死寂，干枯焦裂，木柴难寻。
Over the carcass of the horse, they built a platform of hewn logs; trunks of smaller trees and limbs from the greater, and the thickest straightest branches they could find. They laid the wood east to west, from sunrise to sunset. On the platform they piled Khal Drogo’s treasures: his great tent, his painted vests, his saddles and harness, the whip his father had given him when he came to manhood, the arakh he had used to slay Khal Ogo and his son, a mighty dragonbone bow. Aggo would have added the weapons Drogo’s bloodriders had given Dany for bride gifts as well, but she forbade it. “Those are mine,” she told him, “and I mean to keep them.” Another layer of brush was piled about the khal’s treasures, and bundles of dried grass scattered over them.
她手下的人带回纠结的绵木、紫灌木以及束束褐草。他们还找来两棵生得最直的树，砍下树枝，剥去树皮，然后将之劈开，把所得木柴堆成方形，中间放满稻草、灌木、树皮屑和干草。拉卡洛从剩下的小马群里挑了一头骏马，虽然比不上卓戈卡奥的赤红坐骑，但世间原本就少有与之匹敌的畜生。阿戈把它牵到木柴堆成的方形中间，喂它吃了一颗干瘪的苹果，然后照它面门一斧砍去，利落地把它放倒。
Ser Jorah Mormont drew her aside as the sun was creeping toward its zenith. “Princess …” he began.
弥丽·马兹·笃尔手脚被缚，站在漫漫烟尘中，睁大那双黑眼，不安地看着这一切。“杀马是不够的，”她告诉丹妮，“血液本身没有力量，你既不懂魔咒的语言，更没有寻求这种语言的智慧。你以为血魔法是小孩子玩的把戏？你称呼我为‘巫魔女’，仿佛那是个诅咒，但它真正的意思其实是‘智慧’。你只是个年幼无知的孩子，无论你打算做什么，都注定不会成功。为我松绑，我会帮你。”
“Why do you call me that?” Dany challenged him. “My brother Viserys was your king, was he not?”
“我听够了巫魔女的废话。”丹妮对乔戈说。他取出鞭子交给她，在那之后，女祭司沉默了。
“He was, my lady.”
他们拿柴薪在马尸上堆起一座平台，用上了小树的主干、大树的枝桠，以及所有能找到的最粗最直的枝条。他们将木柴从东摆到西，象征日升到日落，然后在平台上放置卓戈卡奥的宝物：他的大帐篷、他的彩绘背心、他的马鞍和缰绳、他成年时父亲所赠的马鞭、他那把曾击杀奥戈卡奥父子的亚拉克弯刀，还有他巨大的龙骨长弓。阿戈原本要把卓戈的血盟卫赠与丹妮作新娘礼的武器也放上去，却被她阻止。“那些是我的东西，”她对他说，“我要留着。”卡奥的宝物上又铺了一层灌木枝条，然后放上几捆干草。
“Viserys is dead. I am his heir, the last blood of House Targaryen. Whatever was his is mine now.”
太阳逐渐朝天顶爬去，乔拉·莫尔蒙爵士把她拉到一边。“公主殿下……”他开口。
“My … queen,” Ser Jorah said, going to one knee. “My sword that was his is yours, Daenerys. And my heart as well, that never belonged to your brother. I am only a knight, and I have nothing to offer you but exile, but I beg you, hear me. Let Khal Drogo go. You shall not be alone. I promise you, no man shall take you to Vaes Dothrak unless you wish to go. You need not join the dosh khaleen . Come east with me. Yi Ti, Qarth, the Jade Sea, Asshai by the Shadow. We will see all the wonders yet unseen, and drink what wines the gods see fit to serve us. Please, Khaleesi . I know what you intend. Do not. Do not.”
“你为何如此称呼我？”丹妮质问他，“我哥哥韦赛里斯从前是你的国王，不是吗？”
“I must,” Dany told him. She touched his face, fondly, sadly. “You do not understand.”
“是的，小姐。”
“I understand that you loved him,” Ser Jorah said in a voice thick with despair. “I loved my lady wife once, yet I did not die with her. You are my queen, my sword is yours, but do not ask me to stand aside as you climb on Drogo’s pyre. I will not watch you burn.”
“如今韦赛里斯死了，我就是他的继承人，是坦格利安家族的最后血脉，过去属于他的东西，现在都是我的。”
“Is that what you fear?” Dany kissed him lightly on his broad forehead. “I am not such a child as that, sweet ser.”
“是……女王陛下。”乔拉爵士说着单膝跪下。“丹妮莉丝，我的剑是您的，我的心也是您的——而在过去，我这颗心却不曾属于您哥哥。我仅是一介骑士，遭遇放逐，身无长物，但我求求您，听我说。让卓戈卡奥去罢，你绝不会孤身一人。我向你保证，除非你自愿，否则谁都别想带你回维斯·多斯拉克，你无须加入多希卡林。跟我走吧，我们去东方，去夷地、魁尔斯、玉海和阴影之地旁的亚夏，我们将会看到前所未见的奇观，啜饮天上诸神赐予我们的玉露琼浆。我求求您，卡丽熙，我知道您的打算，但请您千万别这么做，千万不要啊。”
“You do not mean to die with him? You swear it, my queen?”
“我必须这么做，”丹妮一边说，一边伸出手，爱怜而哀伤地轻抚他的脸颊，“你不了解。”
“I swear it,” she said in the Common Tongue of the Seven Kingdoms that by rights were hers.
“不，我了解您深爱着他，”乔拉爵士的声音里充满绝望。“过去，我也深爱着我的妻子，但我并不曾与她生死相随。您是我的女王，我的剑是您的，但你若要爬上卓戈的火葬台，休想叫我袖手旁观，我绝不能眼睁睁地看着你被火焚烧。”
The third level of the platform was woven of branches no thicker than a finger, and covered with dry leaves and twigs. They laid them north to south, from ice to fire, and piled them high with soft cushions and sleeping silks. The sun had begun to lower toward the west by the time they were done. Dany called the Dothraki around her. Fewer than a hundred were left. How many had Aegon started with? she wondered. It did not matter.
“你怕的就是这个？”丹妮轻轻地吻了他宽阔的额头。“好爵士，我没有孩子气到那种地步啊。”
“You will be my khalasar,” she told them. “I see the faces of slaves. I free you. Take off your collars. Go if you wish, no one shall harm you. If you stay, it will be as brothers and sisters, husbands and wives.” The black eyes watched her, wary, expressionless. “I see the children, women, the wrinkled faces of the aged. I was a child yesterday. Today I am a woman. Tomorrow I will be old. To each of you I say, give me your hands and your hearts, and there will always be a place for you.” She turned to the three young warriors of her khas . “Jhogo, to you I give the silver-handled whip that was my bride gift, and name you ko , and ask your oath, that you will live and die as blood of my blood, riding at my side to keep me safe from harm.”
“你不会陪他殉死？女王陛下，您发誓不会这么做？”
Jhogo took the whip from her hands, but his face was confused. “Khaleesi,” he said hesitantly, “this is not done. It would shame me, to be bloodrider to a woman.”
“我发誓。”她用七大王国——那些照理归她统治的国度——的通用语答道。
“Aggo,” Dany called, paying no heed to Jhogo’s words. If I look back I am lost . “To you I give the dragonbone bow that was my bride gift.” It was double-curved, shiny black and exquisite, taller than she was. “I name you ko , and ask your oath, that you should live and die as blood of my blood, riding at my side to keep me safe from harm.”
平台的第三层用跟手指一般粗细的树枝搭成，上面铺满干叶和枯枝。他们将枝叶从北摆到南，象征玄冰到烈火，最后把柔软的枕头和丝被堆在最上，积得老高。等到一切备妥，太阳已经渐渐西沉。丹妮将所剩无几、尚不满一百的多斯拉克人召集到身边。当年伊耿扬帆出征时，最初又带了多少人呢？她不禁好奇地想。多少都没有关系。
Aggo accepted the bow with lowered eyes. “I cannot say these words. Only a man can lead a khalasar or name a ko.”
“你们将是我的卡拉萨。”她对他们说，“在你们当中，我看到了奴隶的脸庞，首先，我放你们自由。取下你们的奴隶项圈吧，如果你们要走，没人会加以阻止，但如果你们选择留下，你们将彼此成为兄弟姐妹、男女夫妻。”一双双黑眼睛看着她，充满戒心，面无表情。“在这里，我更看到幼儿、妇女和满是皱纹的老人的脸孔。昨天我尚为幼儿，今夕我已成为女人，明日我便将衰老。我告诉你们中每一个：把你们的双手和你们的心灵交给我，这里永远有你们的一席之地。”她转身面对自己卡斯部众的三名年轻战士。“乔戈，这把银柄长鞭是我的新娘礼，在此我把它送给你，并任命你为寇，同时要求你宣誓成为吾血之血，与我同生共死，并肩作战，保护我免于危难。”
“Rakharo,” Dany said, turning away from the refusal, “you shall have the great arakh that was my bride gift, with hilt and blade chased in gold. And you too I name my ko , and ask that you live and die as blood of my blood, riding at my side to keep me safe from harm.”
乔戈从她手中接过鞭子，脸上却满是困惑。“卡丽熙，”他有些犹豫地说，“这事不成的。当女人的血盟卫，会令我感到羞耻的。”
“You are khaleesi,” Rakharo said, taking the arakh . “I shall ride at your side to Vaes Dothrak beneath the Mother of Mountains, and keep you safe from harm until you take your place with the crones of the dosh khaleen . No more can I promise.”
“阿戈，”丹妮唤道，不理会乔戈的话。如果我回头，一切就都完了。“这把龙骨长弓是我的新娘礼，在此我把它送给你，”那把双弧龙弓，雕工精细，乌黑发亮，立起来比她还高。“我也任命你为寇，同时要求你宣誓成为吾血之血，与我同生共死，并肩作战，保护我免于危难。”
She nodded, as calmly as if she had not heard his answer, and turned to the last of her champions. “Ser Jorah Mormont,” she said, “first and greatest of my knights, I have no bride gift to give you, but I swear to you, one day you shall have from my hands a longsword like none the world has ever seen, dragon-forged and made of Valyrian steel. And I would ask for your oath as well.”
阿戈垂下眼睛，接受了那把弓。“我无法宣誓。只有男人才能领导卡拉萨，或是任命别人为寇。”
“You have it, my queen,” Ser Jorah said, kneeling to lay his sword at her feet. “I vow to serve you, to obey you, to die for you if need be.”
“拉卡洛，”丹妮不理会他的拒绝。“这把亚拉克巨弯刀是我的新娘礼，它的刀鞘和刀身都镶上了金线，在此我把它送给你，并任命你为寇，同时要求你成为吾血之血，与我同生共死，并肩作战，保护我免于危难。”
“Whatever may come?”
“您是卡丽熙，”拉卡洛说罢接过亚拉克弯刀。“我将与您并肩骑到圣母山下的维斯·多斯拉克，保护您免于危难，直到您加入多希卡林的老妪。除此之外，我无法作任何承诺。”
“Whatever may come.”
她冷静地点点头，仿佛压根儿没听见他的回答，然后她转身面对她的最后一名武士。“乔拉·莫尔蒙爵士，”她说，“你是追随我的第一个、也是最忠勇的骑士，我虽无新娘礼相赠，但我向你发誓，有朝一日，你将会从我手中得到一把举世无双的长剑，它将由真龙打造，以瓦雷利亚钢铸成。我也要求你宣誓效忠。”
“I shall hold you to that oath. I pray you never regret the giving of it.” Dany lifted him to his feet. Stretching on her toes to reach his lips, she kissed the knight gently and said, “You are the first of my Queensguard.”
“女王陛下，我的命是您的，”乔拉骑士说着单膝跪下，将佩剑放在她脚边。“我宣誓为您效力，奉行您一切旨意，牺牲性命，再所不辞。”
She could feel the eyes of the khalasar on her as she entered her tent. The Dothraki were muttering and giving her strange sideways looks from the corners of their dark almond eyes. They thought her mad, Dany realized. Perhaps she was. She would know soon enough. If I look back I am lost .
“至死不渝？”
Her bath was scalding hot when Irri helped her into the tub, but Dany did not flinch or cry aloud. She liked the heat. It made her feel clean. Jhiqui had scented the water with the oils she had found in the market in Vaes Dothrak; the steam rose moist and fragrant. Doreah washed her hair and combed it out, working loose the mats and tangles. Irri scrubbed her back. Dany closed her eyes and let the smell and the warmth enfold her. She could feel the heat soaking through the soreness between her thighs. She shuddered when it entered her, and her pain and stiffness seemed to dissolve. She floated.
“至死不渝。”
When she was clean, her handmaids helped her from the water. Irri and Jhiqui fanned her dry, while Doreah brushed her hair until it fell like a river of liquid silver down her back. They scented her with spiceflower and cinnamon; a touch on each wrist, behind her ears, on the tips of her milk-heavy breasts. The last dab was for her sex. Irri’s finger felt as light and cool as a lover’s kiss as it slid softly up between her lips.
“我将谨记你的誓言，希望你永不后悔。”丹妮扶他起身，然后垫起脚尖，轻柔地在骑士唇上印下一吻。“你是我第一个女王铁卫。”
Afterward, Dany sent them all away, so she might prepare Khal Drogo for his final ride into the night lands. She washed his body clean and brushed and oiled his hair, running her fingers through it for the last time, feeling the weight of it, remembering the first time she had touched it, the night of their wedding ride. His hair had never been cut. How many men could die with their hair uncut? She buried her face in it and inhaled the dark fragrance of the oils. He smelled like grass and warm earth, like smoke and semen and horses. He smelled like Drogo. Forgive me, sun of my life , she thought. Forgive me for all I have done and all I must do. I paid the price, my star, but it was too high, too high …
她进帐时，感觉整个卡拉萨都在注目她。多斯拉克人窃窃私语，睁着杏仁形的黑眼睛，用眼角余光怪异地打量她。他们一定以为我疯了，丹妮明白，或许我真疯了，究竟是不是这样，很快就能揭晓。如果我回头，一切就都完了。
Dany braided his hair and slid the silver rings onto his mustache and hung his bells one by one. So many bells, gold and silver and bronze. Bells so his enemies would hear him coming and grow weak with fear. She dressed him in horsehair leggings and high boots, buckling a belt heavy with gold and silver medallions about his waist. Over his scarred chest she slipped a painted vest, old and faded, the one Drogo had loved best. For herself she chose loose sandsilk trousers, sandals that laced halfway up her legs, and a vest like Drogo’s.
伊丽搀她进入浴缸，洗澡水烫得吓人，但丹妮既未退缩，也未吭声。她喜欢这种热，让她有干净的感觉。姬琪在水里洒了香油，那是她在维斯·多斯拉克的市集里收的礼物，此刻帐篷里蒸汽四溢，馨香弥漫。多莉亚为她洗净头发，把纠缠打结的地方都梳理柔顺，伊丽则替她刷背。丹妮阖上双眼，任香气和暖意裹住全身。她可以感觉热气渗进双腿间的酸痛，当热气进入体内时，她禁不住颤抖，接着，所有的疼痛和僵硬似乎都随之融化，令她飘飘欲仙。
The sun was going down when she called them back to carry his body to the pyre. The Dothraki watched in silence as Jhogo and Aggo bore him from the tent. Dany walked behind them. They laid him down on his cushions and silks, his head toward the Mother of Mountains far to the northeast.
沐浴干净后，女仆扶她走出浴缸。伊丽和姬琪为她擦干身体，多莉亚则为她梳整头发，将她一头长发梳成银色瀑布，流泻到后背。她们为她抹上辛香花和肉桂：双腕、耳后、肿胀的乳头各轻触一点，最后抹在下体。伊丽的手指轻轻滑过细部，冰凉而温柔，有如爱人的吻。
“Oil,” she commanded, and they brought forth the jars and poured them over the pyre, soaking the silks and the brush and the bundles of dry grass, until the oil trickled from beneath the logs and the air was rich with fragrance. “Bring my eggs,” Dany commanded her handmaids. Something in her voice made them run.
在这之后，丹妮把她们都遣走，亲自帮卓戈卡奥准备前往夜晚国度的最后一趟旅程。她洗净他的身体，梳理他的头发，并为之搽上香油。她最后一次伸手滑过他的头发，感觉到它们的重量，想起新婚当晚自己初次碰触的情景。他的头发从未修剪，有多少死者有如此殊荣呢？她把脸深埋其中，吸进发油朦胧的芳香。他闻起来有青草和大地的感觉，有轻烟、精液和骏马的气息，他闻起来有卓戈的味道。我生命中的太阳，请你原谅我，她想，原谅我所做的一切，以及我必须做的一切。我的星星，我付出了代价，可这个代价实在太高、太高了……
Ser Jorah took her arm. “My queen, Drogo will have no use for dragon’s eggs in the night lands. Better to sell them in Asshai. Sell one and we can buy a ship to take us back to the Free Cities. Sell all three and you will be a wealthy woman all your days.”
丹妮为他扎起发辫，把银环穿上他的胡子，又把铃铛一个个系在他发梢。这么多铃铛，其中有金、银，还有青铜，这些铃铛将向他的敌人宣告他的到来，令他们胆怯害怕。她为他穿上马鬃绑腿和高统长靴，在他腰间系上一条满是金银奖牌的沉重皮带。最后，她为他穿上彩绘背心，遮住胸膛的伤疤，这背心虽然老旧褪色，却是他最喜欢的一件。至于自己，她选了一件宽松的沙丝长裤，一双绑到膝盖的凉鞋，以及和卓戈穿的相似的背心。
“They were not given to me to sell,” Dany told him.
当她召唤他们来把卓戈的遗体搬到火葬台上时，太阳已经快要下山。乔戈和阿戈抬着他走出帐篷，多斯拉克人在旁静默地观看。丹妮走在他们之后。他们让他躺在自己的枕头和丝被上，头朝遥远东北的圣母山。
She climbed the pyre herself to place the eggs around her sun-and-stars. The black beside his heart, under his arm. The green beside his head, his braid coiled around it. The cream-and-gold down between his legs. When she kissed him for the last time, Dany could taste the sweetness of the oil on his lips.
“拿油来。”她一声令下，他们便抱来那一罐罐香油，浇淋在火葬堆上，浸湿了丝被、树枝和捆捆干草，渗进下面的木柴，空气中弥漫着香气。“把我的蛋也拿来。”丹妮吩咐女仆，声音里的某种东西促使她们拔腿就跑。
As she climbed down off the pyre, she noticed Mirri Maz Duur watching her. “You are mad,” the godswife said hoarsely.
乔拉爵士抓住她的臂膀。“女王陛下，卓戈在夜晚的国度是用不着龙蛋的，不如拿到亚夏去卖了，只需卖一颗，我们便足以买下一艘大船，返回自由贸易城邦。而卖掉三颗所换来的财富，够您一辈子享用不尽。”
“Is it so far from madness to wisdom?” Dany asked. “Ser Jorah, take this maegi and bind her to the pyre.”
“他送我这些蛋，不是要我拿去卖的。”丹妮告诉他。
“To the … my queen, no, hear me …”
她爬上火葬堆，亲自将龙蛋放置于她的日和星身边。黑色的放在他心上，用手掌按住；绿色的放在他头旁，用发辫卷起；乳白和金黄相间的那颗则放在他双腿之间。随后，丹妮最后一次与他吻别，尝到他嘴唇上香精的甜蜜。
“Do as I say.” Still he hesitated, until her anger flared. “You swore to obey me, whatever might come. Rakharo, help him.”
从火葬台上爬下来时，她注意到弥丽·马兹·笃尔注视着自己。“你疯了。”女祭司嘶声道。
The godswife did not cry out as they dragged her to Khal Drogo’s pyre and staked her down amidst his treasures. Dany poured the oil over the woman’s head herself. “I thank you, Mirri Maz Duur,” she said, “for the lessons you have taught me.”
“疯狂与智慧，真有那么大差别吗？”丹妮问，“乔拉爵士，将这巫魔女绑上火葬台。”
“You will not hear me scream,” Mirri responded as the oil dripped from her hair and soaked her clothing.
“绑上火……不，女王陛下，请您听我说……”
“I will,” Dany said, “but it is not your screams I want, only your life. I remember what you told me. Only death can pay for life.” Mirri Maz Duur opened her mouth, but made no reply. As she stepped away, Dany saw that the contempt was gone from the maegi’s flat black eyes; in its place was something that might have been fear. Then there was nothing to be done but watch the sun and look for the first star.
“照我的话去做，”看他依旧犹豫不决，终于燃起了她的熊熊怒火。“你不是宣誓奉行我的意旨，至死不渝么？拉卡洛，你来帮他。”
When a horselord dies, his horse is slain with him, so he might ride proud into the night lands. The bodies are burned beneath the open sky, and the khal rises on his fiery steed to take his place among the stars. The more fiercely the man burned in life, the brighter his star will shine in the darkness.
于是女祭司被他俩拖到卓戈卡奥的火葬台上，跟他的宝物绑在一起。她没有叫喊。丹妮亲自将香油倒在那女人头上。“我感谢你，弥丽·马兹·笃尔，”她说，“感谢你教会我的一切。”
Jhogo spied it first. “There,” he said in a hushed voice. Dany looked and saw it, low in the east. The first star was a comet, burning red. Bloodred; fire red; the dragon’s tail. She could not have asked for a stronger sign.
“你绝不会听见我的哀嚎。”弥丽回答。香油从她的发际流下，渗进衣服。
Dany took the torch from Aggo’s hand and thrust it between the logs. The oil took the fire at once, the brush and dried grass a heartbeat later. Tiny flames went darting up the wood like swift red mice, skating over the oil and leaping from bark to branch to leaf. A rising heat puffed at her face, soft and sudden as a lover’s breath, but in seconds it had grown too hot to bear. Dany stepped backward. The wood crackled, louder and louder. Mirri Maz Duur began to sing in a shrill, ululating voice. The flames whirled and writhed, racing each other up the platform. The dusk shimmered as the air itself seemed to liquefy from the heat. Dany heard logs spit and crack. The fires swept over Mirri Maz Duur. Her song grew louder, shriller … then she gasped, again and again, and her song became a shuddering wail, thin and high and full of agony.
“不，我会的，”丹妮说，“但我要的不是你的哀嚎，而是你的生命。我记得你曾对我说：惟有死亡方能换取生命。”弥丽·马兹·笃尔张口欲言，但最后还是没有答话。丹妮步下火葬台，发现巫魔女那双平板黑眼里的轻蔑已经不见，取而代之的是近似恐惧的神色。能做的都已经做了，接下来就是等待太阳落幕，群星现身。
And now the flames reached her Drogo, and now they were all around him. His clothing took fire, and for an instant the khal was clad in wisps of floating orange silk and tendrils of curling smoke, grey and greasy. Dany’s lips parted and she found herself holding her breath. Part of her wanted to go to him as Ser Jorah had feared, to rush into the flames to beg for his forgiveness and take him inside her one last time, the fire melting the flesh from their bones until they were as one, forever.
每当马王死去，他的坐骑也会被杀陪葬，如此他才可以骑乘骏马，昂然进入夜晚的国度。当他们的遗体在苍天之下火葬时，卡奥将骑着烈焰熊熊的炎马，腾越而出，化为天际的星斗。遗体燃烧得越旺，他在黑暗中的星宿就越是熠熠发光。
She could smell the odor of burning flesh, no different than horseflesh roasting in a firepit. The pyre roared in the deepening dusk like some great beast, drowning out the fainter sound of Mirri Maz Duur’s screaming and sending up long tongues of flame to lick at the belly of the night. As the smoke grew thicker, the Dothraki backed away, coughing. Huge orange gouts of fire unfurled their banners in that hellish wind, the logs hissing and cracking, glowing cinders rising on the smoke to float away into the dark like so many newborn fireflies. The heat beat at the air with great red wings, driving the Dothraki back, driving off even Mormont, but Dany stood her ground. She was the blood of the dragon, and the fire was in her.
第一个发现的是乔戈。“在那里。”他压低声音说。丹妮朝他指的方向望去，低低的东方天际，有一颗红色的彗星，那是血的红色，火的红色，拖着龙的尾巴。她无法要求比这更强的征兆了。
She had sensed the truth of it long ago, Dany thought as she took a step closer to the conflagration, but the brazier had not been hot enough. The flames writhed before her like the women who had danced at her wedding, whirling and singing and spinning their yellow and orange and crimson veils, fearsome to behold, yet lovely, so lovely, alive with heat. Dany opened her arms to them, her skin flushed and glowing. This is a wedding, too , she thought. Mirri Maz Duur had fallen silent. The godswife thought her a child, but children grow, and children learn.
丹妮从阿戈手中接过火把，插进柴堆。香油立即起火燃烧，细枝和干草只隔了一个心跳的瞬间也马上跟进。细小的火苗从柴堆各处窜出，有如动作迅捷的红鼠，滑过油层，从树皮跃到枝干，再跳上叶子。一股热气从火中升腾，朝她迎面扑来，轻柔而突兀，恍如爱人的呼息，但几秒之后，就热得令人难以忍受了。丹妮向后退去，木柴哔啪作响，声音越来越大，弥丽·马兹·笃尔开始用高亢尖锐的声音歌唱。火焰时而盘旋，时而扭动，彼此竟相追逐，朝台顶节节攀升。空气也仿佛因高热而液化，在暮色中闪闪发亮。丹妮听见柴薪爆裂，烈焰淹没了弥丽·马兹·笃尔，她的歌声变得更嘹亮、更尖锐……然后她突然喘了口气，再喘一口、一口，接着歌声成了颤抖的嚎啕，尖细高亢，充满痛苦。
Another step, and Dany could feel the heat of the sand on the soles of her feet, even through her sandals. Sweat ran down her thighs and between her breasts and in rivulets over her cheeks, where tears had once run. Ser Jorah was shouting behind her, but he did not matter anymore, only the fire mattered. The flames were so beautiful, the loveliest things she had ever seen, each one a sorcerer robed in yellow and orange and scarlet, swirling long smoky cloaks. She saw crimson firelions and great yellow serpents and unicorns made of pale blue flame; she saw fish and foxes and monsters, wolves and bright birds and flowering trees, each more beautiful than the last. She saw a horse, a great grey stallion limned in smoke, its flowing mane a nimbus of blue flame. Yes, my love, my sun-and-stars, yes, mount now, ride now .
火焰烧到了卓戈，很快将他团团围住。他的衣服着了火，刹那间，卡奥仿佛穿着翻飞的橙色丝衣，身上冒出缕缕灰烟。丹妮张大了嘴巴，这才发现自己早已屏住呼吸。正如乔拉爵士所担心的，她心中的一部分只想冲进烈焰，请求他宽恕自己，最后一次进到自己体内。火熔肌肤，只余枯骨，长相厮守，直到永远。
Her vest had begun to smolder, so Dany shrugged it off and let it fall to the ground. The painted leather burst into sudden flame as she skipped closer to the fire, her breasts bare to the blaze, streams of milk flowing from her red and swollen nipples. Now , she thought, now , and for an instant she glimpsed Khal Drogo before her, mounted on his smoky stallion, a flaming lash in his hand. He smiled, and the whip snaked down at the pyre, hissing.
她闻到人肉烧熟的味道，这与营火上烤马肉的气息并无二致。在渐渐深沉的暮色里，火葬台宛如一只咆哮的巨兽，盖过了弥丽·马兹·笃尔微弱的惨叫，吐出长长的火舌，舔噬夜空的肚腹。烟雾愈加浓密，多斯拉克人一边咳嗽，一边纷纷后退。橙色的巨焰鼓起炼狱的强风，将附近的旗帜吹得啪哒作响，木柴嘶声爆裂，发光的余烬自烟幕中升起，朝无边的黑夜飘去，仿若千百只新生的萤火虫。烈焰高升，挥动着巨大而火红的翅膀，逼得多斯拉克人节节退后，连莫尔蒙也走避开来，只有丹妮纹丝不动。她是真龙传人，体内有熊熊烈焰。
She heard a crack , the sound of shattering stone. The platform of wood and brush and grass began to shift and collapse in upon itself. Bits of burning wood slid down at her, and Dany was showered with ash and cinders. And something else came crashing down, bouncing and rolling, to land at her feet; a chunk of curved rock, pale and veined with gold, broken and smoking. The roaring filled the world, yet dimly through the firefall Dany heard women shriek and children cry out in wonder.
早在很久以前，她便已察觉了真相，只是当时的火盆不够热，丹妮一边想，一边朝大火走近一步。焰火在她面前蠕动，活如婚礼当天的女舞者，旋转着，高歌着，舞动着她们红橙黄三色的头纱。它们模样虽然骇人，形体却随着高热展现生机，显得异常美丽。丹妮张开双臂，迎向它们，她的皮肤泛红发光。这也像一场婚礼啊，她心想。弥丽·马兹·笃尔已经安静下来。女祭司当她是小孩子，但孩子是会成长，会学习的。
Only death can pay for life .
丹妮再踏前一步，感觉到沙土的高热透过凉鞋底传到脚掌。汗水流过她的大腿和乳房，如河流一样自她双颊奔泻而下，那里本是她流干泪水的地方。乔拉爵士在背后喊她，但他已经不重要了，惟一要紧的是火。火焰是如此美丽，她此生没见过比这更漂亮的事物，每一簇火，都像身穿红橙黄三色袍子，肩披飘舞冒烟长斗篷的巫师。她看见鲜红的火狮、金黄的巨蛇和淡蓝火苗组成的独角兽，她看见鱼、狐狸和怪物，看见狼、鲜丽的飞乌和繁花的大树，一个比一个漂亮。最后，她看见一匹浓烟绘成的灰骏马，飞扬的马鬃是一团发光的蓝火。是的，吾爱，我的日和星，是的，上马吧，勇敢地骑马前行吧。
And there came a second crack , loud and sharp as thunder, and the smoke stirred and whirled around her and the pyre shifted, the logs exploding as the fire touched their secret hearts. She heard the screams of frightened horses, and the voices of the Dothraki raised in shouts of fear and terror, and Ser Jorah calling her name and cursing. No , she wanted to shout to him, no, my good knight, do not fear for me. The fire is mine. I am Daenerys Stormborn, daughter of dragons, bride of dragons, mother of dragons, don’t you see? Don’t you SEE? With a belch of flame and smoke that reached thirty feet into the sky, the pyre collapsed and came down around her. Unafraid, Dany stepped forward into the firestorm, calling to her children.
她的背心开始冒烟，丹妮把它脱开，任它落到地面，彩绘皮革立即爆出朵朵红焰。她朝火再迈一步，双乳暴露，火焰炙烤下，奶水如溪流般从她红润肿胀的乳头流下。就是现在，她明白，就是现在。刹那间，她瞥见卓戈卡奥正在她前方，骑着那匹烟灰骏马，手握火焰长鞭。他朝她微笑，只听嘶的一声，长鞭如蛇般朝火葬台窜去。
The third crack was as loud and sharp as the breaking of the world.
喀啦，声音好似顽石挣裂。由木柴、细枝和干草搭建而成的平台开始摇晃，向内倒塌。燃烧的碎木片散落在她身旁，丹妮沐浴在一片灰烬和火星之中。某个不知名的东西轰隆滚落，弹跳之后掉在她脚边：那是一颗有弧度的石头，乳白色中有金黄纹路，正裂开冒烟。火势轰隆震天，隔着崩塌的烈焰，丹妮隐约听见妇女的尖叫和孩童惊奇的呼喊。
When the fire died at last and the ground became cool enough to walk upon, Ser Jorah Mormont found her amidst the ashes, surrounded by blackened logs and bits of glowing ember and the burnt bones of man and woman and stallion. She was naked, covered with soot, her clothes turned to ash, her beautiful hair all crisped away … yet she was unhurt.
惟有死亡方能换取生命。
The cream-and-gold dragon was suckling at her left breast, the green-and-bronze at the right. Her arms cradled them close. The black-and-scarlet beast was draped across her shoulders, its long sinuous neck coiled under her chin. When it saw Jorah, it raised its head and looked at him with eyes as red as coals.
喀啦，尖声轰隆有如雷霆。火葬台再度摇晃，浓烟卷起，在她周围旋绕，烈焰烧至中心，干柴纷纷爆裂。她听见马儿的惊叫，听见多斯拉克人惊恐的叫喊，听见乔拉爵士唤着她的名字，不停咒骂。不，她想吼回去，不，我亲爱的好骑士，毋需为我担心。你可知道？火焰本属于我，我是风暴降生丹妮莉丝，龙的女儿，龙的新娘，龙的母亲，你难道看不到吗？你难道听不见吗？随着一柱高达三十尺的擎天烈焰和浓烟，火葬台终于彻底崩塌，朝她四周坍倒下来。丹妮毫不畏惧地向前走去，走进火焰风暴，呼唤她的孩子。
Wordless, the knight fell to his knees. The men of her khas came up behind him. Jhogo was the first to lay his arakh at her feet. “Blood of my blood,” he murmured, pushing his face to the smoking earth. “Blood of my blood,” she heard Aggo echo. “Blood of my blood,” Rakharo shouted.
喀啦，震耳欲聋，仿佛天崩地裂。
And after them came her handmaids, and then the others, all the Dothraki, men and women and children, and Dany had only to look at their eyes to know that they were hers now, today and tomorrow and forever, hers as they had never been Drogo’s.
当火焰终于熄灭，地面稍稍冷却之后，乔拉·莫尔蒙爵士在一片灰烬之中找到了她。在她身旁，尽是焦黑的木炭和发光的火烬，以及男人、女人和骏马烧焦的骨头。她浑身赤裸，覆盖烟灰，华裳全成灰屑，美丽的头发也焚烧殆尽……但她本人却安然无恙。
As Daenerys Targaryen rose to her feet, her black hissed , pale smoke venting from its mouth and nostrils. The other two pulled away from her breasts and added their voices to the call, translucent wings unfolding and stirring the air, and for the first time in hundreds of years, the night came alive with the music of dragons.那只乳白和金黄相间的龙吸吮着她的左乳，青铜与碧绿的那只吸着右乳，她用双手环抱着它们。黑红相间的那只龙垂挂在她肩头，用长长而蜿蜒的脖子缠绕着她的下巴。当它看到乔拉，便抬起头，睁大亮红如炭的眼睛盯着他。
那只乳白和金黄相间的龙吸吮着她的左乳，青铜与碧绿的那只吸着右乳，她用双手环抱着它们。黑红相间的那只龙垂挂在她肩头，用长长而蜿蜒的脖子缠绕着她的下巴。当它看到乔拉，便抬起头，睁大亮红如炭的眼睛盯着他。
骑士一言不发地跪下，她的卡斯部众也跟上来。乔戈头一个将亚拉克弯刀放在她脚边。“吾血之血，”他喃喃道，将脸贴近冒烟的地面。“吾血之血，”她听见阿戈应和。“吾血之血，”拉卡洛叫道。
在他们之后，她的女仆们也来了，接着是其他的多斯拉克人，不论男女老幼，丹妮只需看看他们的眼睛，便知他们已经臣服于她，今日如此，明日亦然，直到永远，不是惧于卓戈威势的臣服，而是打从心底的心悦诚服。
丹妮莉丝·坦格利安站起身来，她的黑龙嘶地一声从口鼻吐出几缕白烟，另外的两只也同时松开她的乳头，齐声加入它的怒吼。它们张开半透明的翅膀，拍打空气。于是，龙族齐声高鸣的乐音响彻夜空，数百年来，这是头一次。